554

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

High Performance InP-Based Photonic
ICs—A Tutorial
Larry A. Coldren, Fellow, IEEE, Fellow, OSA, Steven C. Nicholes, Leif Johansson, Member, IEEE,
Sasa Ristic, Member, IEEE, Robert S. Guzzon, Erik J. Norberg, and Uppiliappan Krishnamachari
(Invited Tutorial)

Abstract—The performance of relatively complex photonic integrated circuits (PICs) is now reaching such high levels that the
long sought goal of realizing low-cost, –size, -weight, and -power
chips to replace hybrid solutions seems to have been achieved for
some applications. This tutorial traces some of the evolution of this
technology that has led to an array of high-functionality InP-based
PICs useful in optical sensing and communication applications. Examples of recent high-performance PICs that have arisen out of
these developments are presented.
Fundamental to much of this work was the development of integration strategies to compatibly combine a variety of components
in a relatively simple fabrication process. For the UCSB work, this
was initially based upon the creation of a single-chip widely tunable
semiconductor laser that required the integration of gain, reflector,
phase-tuning and absorber sections. As it provided most of the elements needed for many more complex PICs, their creation followed
somewhat naturally by adding more of these same elements outside
of the laser cavity using the same processing steps. Of course, additional elements were needed for some of the PICs to be discussed,
but in most cases, these have been added without adding significant processing complexity. Generally, the integration philosophy
has been to avoid patterned epitaxial growths, to use post-growth
processing, such as quantum-well intermixing to provide multiple
bandgaps, rather than multiple epitaxial regrowths, and to focus
on processes that could be performed with vendor growth and implant facilities so that only basic clean room processing facilities
are required.
Index Terms—Photonic integrated circuits (PIC), quantum-well
intermixing (QWI), tunable lasers, wavelength converters.

I. INTRODUCTION

H

IGH-PERFORMANCE large-scale photonic integrated circuits (PICs) in InP have recently been created for transmitter, receiver, wavelength-conversion, and
Manuscript received July 16, 2010; revised October 24, 2010; accepted December 09, 2010. Date of publication January 06, 2011; date of current version
February 07, 2011. This work was supported by the DARPA MTO under various contracts. Device fabrication was done in the UCSB nanofabrication facility, part of the NSF funded NNIN network.
L. A. Coldren is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and the Department of Materials, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
93106 USA (e-mail: coldren@engineering.ucsb.edu).
S. C. Nicholes was with the Department of Materials, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA. He is now with Aurrion Photonics, Santa
Barbara, CA 93117 USA.
L. Johansson, S. Ristic, R. S. Guzzon, E. J. Norberg, and U. Krishnamachari
are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2010.2100807

Fig. 1. Network traffic growth.

packet-switching applications [1]–[7]. Applications in coherent
transmitters and receivers as well as in signal-processing circuits are also being explored [8]–[11]. Integration provides a
reduction in system footprint, inter-element coupling losses,
packaging cost, and usually power dissipation, as a single
cooler can be used for multiple functions. Although yield issues
must be addressed, reliability appears to improve once such
issues are, because reliability is often related to packaging or
other external factors once the inherent semiconductor failure
mechanisms are satisfied [1], [2].
Other motivations for photonic integration include the desire
to eliminate or reduce the number of expensive and power-consuming optical-to-electronic-to-optical (OEO) conversions by
performing some of processing in the optical domain. The simplest example might be optical amplification; more complex examples include tunable transceivers and wavelength converters
[4]–[6], [12], [13] and all-optical switching and routing chips
[3], [14].
In order to justify the cost of designing the chip and refining
the fabrication technology for a single unique PIC, however, one
must assume some significant volume for the chip that is being
produced. Otherwise, the cost might be difficult to recover. This
can be somewhat ameliorated by chip designs that use exactly
the same process, so that multiple chips can be placed on the
same wafer, and produced simultaneously. In practice it seems
that both issues are important to address. That is, generic design
rules should be developed that can be used for a wide variety of
PICs, and reasonable production volumes need to be identified.
Production volumes might also be increased by trying to define
a few general purpose PICs that can be used in a number of
applications by a wide number of users.

0733-8724/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

Fig. 2. Two-section etched-groove laser formed by RIE.

Fig. 3. Tunable DBR laser that also employed vertical coupling.

The demand for PICs has been aided by the significant increase in network traffic in recent years as indicated by Fig. 1.
The bandwidth on the optical fiber network is now growing by
two orders of magnitude per decade due to the tremendous increase in data transmission. Some years ago, when efforts on
photonic integration began, network traffic was only growing
in each decade.
by a factor of
II. EARLY WORK
Work on the InGaAsP/InP materials system was still developing in the early 1980s when some of the first efforts to monolithically integrate multiple elements together appeared. Fig. 2
illustrates an early tunable two-section laser effort that used an
etched groove as a partially transmissive mirror between the sections [15]. Such etched grooves provide a very compact mirror,
but due to difficulty in reproducibly fabricating them, they were
replaced by gratings for most applications. Recently, however,
more work is reappearing on etched grooves using improved
etching technology [16].
Fig. 3 shows some of the first integration of active and passive sections using distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) in the
InP system [17]. Multiple-regrowths were employed, and tunable single-frequency lasers were demonstrated, although with
a very modest amount of tuning. The DBR work continued as an
integration platform, but most of the work with grating devices
began to focus on distributed feedback (DFB) lasers in which
the grating is formed along the active region.
Fig. 4 shows an electroabsorption-modulated laser (EML),
first produced in the mid 1980s, but similar to those in production today [18]. It indicates the use of the preferred single-frequency DFB laser together with the integrated EA-modulator
that uses the absorption shift of the bandedge with a reverse

555

Fig. 4. Early EML using DFB butt-jointed to EAM.

bias. It also uses a butt-joint regrowth step to form the modulator next to the laser. Such EMLs are also formed by numerous
other active-passive integration technologies [19], [20].
Coherent technology was being widely explored in the 1980s
because of its promise of increased transmission distance that
should result from improved receiver sensitivity [21]. Er-doped
fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) [22] had not been developed, and
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) was not very cost
competitive because of the cost of WDM repeaters. These
involved de-multiplexing and converting all of the wavelengths
into the electrical domain, amplifying, demultiplexing again to
a lower data rate, regenerating, multiplexing up to the higher
data rate, modulating the information back onto different optical wavelengths, and multiplexing these back into the fiber
again. Indeed, a complex and costly system that didn’t compete
well with simply increasing the data rate or even adding more
fiber.
Thus, coherent approaches, which promised to perhaps
double the repeater separation were very interesting, and they
also offered the possibility of placing the WDM channels closer
together, because the channel filtering would be done by a fixed
IF filter in the RF-domain after heterodyne down-conversion
by tuning the optical Local Oscillator (LO), much as in a radio.
However, making an optical heterodyne receiver was quickly
found to be very difficult to make stable using bulk components.
But, if the components could be integrated on a single chip, perhaps many of the difficult issues would be solved. Thus, some
efforts were initiated to explore this possibility. Fig. 5 illustrates
the most successful of these [23]. It includes all of the optical
components of a coherent receiver, including an integrated LO
laser, a 3 dB coupler, and a balanced detector pair.
Although the results from the chip of Fig. 5 were not extremely impressive, it did set a milestone on what could be accomplished by using photonic integration. Unfortunately, the
work on PICs for coherent did not progress too much further
than this, first because of an economic slow-down in the 1990
timeframe, and then second, because of the appearance of the
EDFA and improved optical multiplexers. These two technologies enabled practical WDM systems to expand to many wavelengths without the need to de-multiplex down to individual
channels for electronic regeneration every 30 km or so. Thus,
by the mid 1990’s dense WDM was being rapidly deployed [24]
and work on coherent was being terminated.
Both the coherent work and that on WDM identified a need
for tunable lasers. For coherent, one desired local oscillators
that could tune across the desired optical wavelength range of
the receiver [25]. For WDM, universal sources [26] that could

556

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

Fig. 7. Active-passive waveguide integration approaches.

Fig. 5. Integrated coherent receiver chip.

Fig. 6. Schematic of SG-DBR laser integrated with a semiconductor-opticalamplifier (SOA) and EAM.

output any channel wavelength across the C-band—the central
band of the EDFA used by fiber optic networks—were desired.
Thus, so-called ‘widely-tunable’ lasers were desired—ones that
could tune across 40 nm or more near 1550 nm. Such lasers were
also desired in various sensing applications where the resolution
was proportional to the wavelength span [27].
Therefore, beginning in the 1980s and throughout the 1990s
there was a lot of work on tunable lasers that continues even
to this day [28]. The widely-tunable lasers became especially
popular during the ‘telecom bubble times’ near the turn of the
century. Many companies were formed, and some were successfully acquired, but only a few of the original technologies continue to be produced today. One of these, the sampled-grating
DBR (SG-DBR) laser [29], as depicted in Fig. 6, is still at the
heart of some products of the JDS-Uniphase Corporation [30].
This single-chip widely-tunable SG-DBR laser, which
contains gain, phase-tuning, absorber and mirror sections,
integrates many of the basic building blocks needed in many
more complex PICs. It utilizes two multielement (sampled)
Distributed Bragg Reflector (DBR) mirrors to provide two
differently spaced multi-peaked reflectors, so that only one
peak from each mirror can line up for a particular current
injection. As the currents into the mirrors are varied, different
combinations of individual mirror peaks (typically spaced by
6 or 7 nm) can be brought into alignment to extend the tuning
bands.
range over a number of
In fact, since this laser was invented at UCSB [31], it became
the starting point for much of the InP-based PIC work that has

been carried out at UCSB over the past two decades. As illustrated in Fig. 6, an amplifier and electro-absorption modulator
can be added external to the laser cavity by simply adding another gain section and passive section (same as phase-tuning
section) along the same waveguide during the same fabrication
process. For the EAM, the terminal is reverse biased to provide
a reduction in the bandgap, and thus add absorption, whereas
for the phase-tuning section, the terminal is forward biased to
inject carriers into the waveguide, thereby reducing the index of
refraction to tune to laser wavelength to smaller values.
Of course, additional elements are needed for some of the
PICs to be discussed, but in most cases, these can be added
without adding significant processing complexity. Generally,
the integration philosophy at UCSB has been to avoid patterned
epitaxial growths, to use post-growth processing, such as
quantum-well intermixing to provide multiple bandgaps, rather
than multiple epitaxial regrowths, and to focus on processes that
could be performed with vendor growth and implant facilities
so that only basic clean room processing facilities are required.
III. BASIC INTEGRATION TECHNOLOGY
A. Active-Passive Axial Waveguide Integration
Fig. 7 illustrates five different approaches to integrate regions
with different absorption/gain properties together along a single
waveguide. As these have been discussed previously in some detail [32], [75], we here will only focus on the right-most three
that have been the object of most of our work. All of these can
be formed with a single ‘blanket’ regrowth of semiconductor
cladding, which does not involve any foreign masking material
on the wafer surface to define the epitaxial growth dynamics
as do the two left-most approaches. In fact, we have been successful in having these blanket regrowth steps done by multiple
vendors with minimal development effort.
Although we have previously [4] also included some discussion of the active-passive platforms that do not require even
this type of simple regrowth, we have dropped the explicit discussion of approaches such as the vertical active-passive twin
guide [33] here because of the large transition distances that
are involved, and the resulting incompatibility with multiple
active-passive interfaces desired in a high-functionality PIC.
Single-material waveguide PICs are also similarly not considered because of the extreme limitations on their performance

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

Fig. 8. Lateral waveguide choices.

and functionality. To summarize, the issues with regrowth
that these approaches sought to avoid are avoided with our
unpatterned blanket regrowth approach without making most
the compromises.
However, although it requires a patterned regrowth, it should
be pointed out that the butt-joint approach does provide the maximum flexibility in choosing the properties of the two waveguide
sections, as the properties of one can be almost totally divorced
from the other, aside from the need to be nominally latticedmatched to InP. Thus, this approach is often used when no compromise in waveguide properties can be tolerated. Nevertheless,
there is a price to pay in fabrication complexity, compatibility
with other structures across a large PIC, and ultimately design
flexibility and yield in using such patterned-growth processes.
The ‘offset quantum-well’ configuration and its close cousin,
the ‘dual-quantum-well’ active-passive geometry are both fabricated by an unpatterned regrowth of the upper cladding on a
base wafer, which has had regions of the MQW-active region
formed on top of a common waveguide removed where passive
waveguides are to be formed. The dual-quantum-well approach
has been used to enhance the performance of modulator sections
placed in the ‘passive’ regions [34].
The ‘quantum-well-intermixed’ (QWI) active-passive configuration [32], [75] is similarly fabricated with an unpatterned
cladding regrowth, but in this case the common waveguide contains the MQW-active region, and the bandgap of the MQW region has been selectively increased by a patterned implant and
one or more annealing steps to selectively intermix the quantumwell barriers and wells in regions that are to become passive, or
perhaps modulator sections, if the shift is not as large. Shifts
nm in the 1550 nm InGaAsP materials and are
saturate
easily controlled. Intermediate shifts, as for modulators, require
careful calibration. The intermixing must also be done in the
absence of other rapidly diffusing species in the wafer, such as
zinc. Thus, as will be detailed in Section IV.D, QWI must be
completed before a zinc-doped p-cladding is regrown.
In all cases the interfaces between the active and passive regions are slanted with respect to the axes of the waveguides that
will be eventually formed to prevent reflections back along the
waveguide.
B. Lateral Waveguide Choices & Mode Transformers
In order to complete the waveguides after their active-passive nature is decided along a particular length, some lateral
waveguiding geometry must be defined. Fig. 8 illustrates four
possibilities.
As indicated, they are arranged from the strongest waveguiding on the left to the weakest on the right. Correspondingly,
the waveguide loss tends to go in the opposite direction, with
the higher-contrast guides having the higher losses, assuming

557

Fig. 9. SEMs of deeply-etched ridge, surface-ridge, and buried-rib waveguides.
Deep ridge is formed by ICP dry etching; surface-ridge by HCl wet etching; and
buried-rib by dry etching followed by regrowth.

Fig. 10. Lateral waveguide transitions. Relative power coupled versus distance
from flare (surface-ridge/deep-ridge—left), or versus lateral misalignment (surface-ridge/buried-rib—right).

similar surface roughness. This is also related to the fact that
the stronger (higher-index-contrast) waveguides need to be
smaller for single-mode operation.
The deeply-etched ridge and surface-ridge types can be
formed after epitaxial growth, whereas both the buried channel
and buried rib must be defined prior to epitaxial regrowth.
Dependent upon the type of active-passive technology used,
this may require a special regrowth. Fig. 9 shows SEM cross
sections of all but the buried channel type.
The surface-ridge waveguide has been a relatively popular
choice in the InGaAsP/InP system, both because of its ease of
fabrication and the fact that crystallographic wet etches can be
used to provide very smooth side walls along some directions in
InP. For example, an InGaAs contact layer can serve as a mask
for a strong HCl etch, which provides very smooth side walls
direction, and it
for InP-clad waveguides aligned with the
will stop-etch on a quaternary waveguide layer [35]. However,
this technique is not useful for waveguide orientations more than
direction.
a few degrees off of the
For the deeply-etched ridge as well as most of the other
waveguide types, dry-etching is generally used. Better pattern
transfer is possible, and orientation dependencies are not as
severe.
A major issue to be addressed if two or more of the different lateral guides are to be used on the same PIC is transitioning between them along some waveguide path. Fig. 10
gives simulated data and schematics for waveguide transitions
between surface-ridge to deep-ridge and surface-ridge to buried
rib guides [14]. As illustrated, in the first case the surface ridge
flares and tapers before the deep ridge section [36]. In the second
case, the surface ridge flares and butt couples to a tapering rib
section.
The other significant type of mode transformation that must
be considered is that in coupling the PIC to a fiber. In this case
the general problem is transforming the mode from an elliptical
shape to a round one as well as increasing its diameter. We will

558

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

2

Fig. 12. 2 2 MMI design example. Schematic on the left; intensity distribution in center (keyed at far right); and plots of net power that would be transmitted if the MMI were terminated at the indicated length. Illustrated finally is
a single input being split equally to the two outputs.

Fig. 11. Compatible mode transformer design. Top—coupling vs lateral fiber
displacement; middle—topview illustrating lateral taper; bottom-left—initial
waveguide and mode cross section; bottom-right—final waveguide and mode
cross section. The detailed material layer structure for these simulations will be
given in Fig. 27.

Fig. 13. SEM of compact 3 dB MMI coupler design. Waveguide width is 2 m
and coupling length is 45 m.

not consider butt-coupling to a fiber because that would require
too much mode expansion, but if the mode can be transitioned to
a circular cross section and increased in diameter by two or three
times, we have found that the coupling loss to simple lensed
dB to
dB.
fibers can be reduced from the typical
Fig. 11 shows schematics of waveguide tapers as well as the
theoretical mode shapes and resulting coupling losses for one
mode transformer concept that can be incorporated into our
blanket regrowth platform.
C. Other Waveguide Elements
Waveguide couplers and splitters are other important elements in Photonic ICs. Multimode interference couplers have
become the most popular way to make 1 2 and 2 2 splitters
because the waveguides are separated at the inputs and outputs
and critical “Y-junctions” are avoided. Fig. 12 illustrates a
design example for a 2 2 coupler.
However, such standard MMI designs can become relatively
large, and if one desires a more compact design, it is possible
to collapse the structure by reducing the width and waveguide
spacing, in effect approaching a zero-gap directional coupler.
Fig. 13 illustrates a 3 dB coupler in which the coupling length
is only 45 m [37].
Another interesting and useful coupler is one with variable
coupling. In order to obtain a very large range of coupling
values, one approach is to use a miniature Mach–Zehnder modulator as the variable coupler [38]. Fig. 14 illustrates this. Here
two 3 dB MMI 2 2 couplers are separated by intermediate
phase modulated delay lines. When the phase of the delay
lines is adjusted, the output power alternates between the two
output waveguides. As can be observed nearly full extinction is

Fig. 14. SEM of variable directional coupler; blow-up of input to MMI; plots
of relative output power to the two output ports.

possible on either output. Such couplers are especially useful
in filter design [39].
A Star coupler may be viewed as simply using a free-space
region to enable one of several input guides to equally illuminate a number of output waveguides [40]. It can also be analyzed via the multimode interference technique. Fig. 15 illustrates a STAR coupler with 8 input and 34 output waveguides. This figure also shows a second device called an arrayed
waveguide grating router (AWGR) [41], [76]. It is formed by
placing a mirror-image STAR coupler at the opposite ends of the
output waveguides of a first STAR coupler once the intermediate
waveguide lengths have been adjusted to vary linearly across
the array. With such a design the device becomes dispersive
in wavelength and can function as a wavelength multiplexer or

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

Fig. 15. 8

2 34 STAR coupler (top) and 8 2 8 AWGR (bottom).

de-multiplexer in a WDM system [42], [43], and with multiple
inputs such AWGRs can also serve as a wavelength-controlled
switching fabric, since the wavelength at the input determines
to which output the power will be switched. In a later section
an array of wavelength converters integrated with an AWGR on
a single chip to demonstrate this kind of switching architecture
will be described.
IV. TOWARD MORE COMPLEX PICS
A. Motivation
As indicated in Section II, by the mid1990s EDFAs and improvements in wavelength multiplexers were enabling the rapid
expansion of WDM technology. Dozens of wavelengths could
be sent over hundreds of kilometers at 2.5 Gb/s per channel
without the need to demux down to single channels and regenerate in the electrical domain at lower data rates. This expensive
OEO every 30 km or so could be avoided. Tunable lasers were
on all of the roadmaps, because universal sources were needed,
and other applications were being proposed. Wavelengths on
fiber became channels between nodes.
One problem that quickly arose was that as some wavelengths
on some fibers became fully utilized, it was desired to change
the information to another wavelength, but this meant OEO, because there was no other way to do this. So researchers began to
look at means to do ‘wavelength conversion’ without the need
to convert every bit of information into an electrical bit at some
lower data rate and then convert it back up to the optical domain
at a different wavelength again. Thus, research on optical wavelength conversion also began in the mid 1990s [44].
At about the same time, it was realized that if one could
change the wavelength of the optical data, one could also use
a passive device, such as the newly devised AWGR to physically switch the data from one port to another, or from one fiber
to another. Thus, still another set of ideas were generated in this
direction [45].
At UCSB, as we were doing leading research on widely-tunable lasers necessary for useful wavelength converters and such

559

Fig. 16. Crossbar switch using an array of wavelength converters as the active switching elements feeding an AWGR, which acts as the passive switching
fabric.

crossbar switches, we quickly got involved in these new directions, and proposed research on a monolithically integrated
space switch based upon integrating an array of wavelength
converters with an AWGR. Fig. 16 is taken from the original
proposal to AFOSR in 1995 [46]. Significant features included
novel wavelength converters consisting of SGDBRs directlymodulated by integrated photodiodes and a compact AWGR
using corner reflectors in the waveguide array.
The chip illustrated in Fig. 16 set about a number of years of
research at UCSB. Most work on wavelength conversion at that
time was using isolated SOAs [47], which consumed a lot of
power and the results were not very impressive. These did not
seem suitable for integration. This was the main reason we decided to go the route of integrating a detector that could directly
drive the gain region of the laser. Our initial proposal included
ideas about using avalanche photodetectors (APDs) for gain in
the detector or ‘gain levered’ active regions in the SGDBR. Soon
we realized that SOA preamplifiers as well as SOA post-amplifiers, as illustrated in Fig. 17, could be made to be fairly efficient,
so these were also included in our designs [48], [77].
As the research continued over several years the desired data
rate for such wavelength converters and crossbar switches increased to 10 Gb/s, and then even to 40 Gb/s. Thus, the directlydriven approach of Fig. 17, was clearly inappropriate. It also
tends to distort the signals, so external modulation approaches
were soon found to be necessary. In fact, the work with a photocurrent-driven Mach–Zehnder modulator integrated with an
SGDBR was published in the same time period [50] as the work
in Fig. 17, as were the efforts to integrate nonlinear SOAs in the
arms of Mach–Zehnder modulators with direct optical injection
into them [51].
Whether to use photodetectors driving modulators or directly
inject the input optical signal into SOAs, which are within a
modulator configuration for wavelength conversion still remains
a topic of research [52]. The PD-modulator approach appears to
require less real estate and power, and no filters are required
to remove the input signal, but the nonlinear SOA approach is

560

Fig. 17. Directly-driven SOA-PD/SGDBR-SOA wavelength converter.
Schematic and equivalent circuit, including eye patterns from input and output
data at 2.5 Gb/s [49].

Fig. 18. QWI-based widely-tunable 40 Gb/s transmitter [52].

somewhat simpler to fabricate and may have higher yield in
arrays.
B. Transmitters, Wavelength Converters, and Other
Mostly-Serial Integration Efforts
Three more recent high-performance PIC efforts centered
around SGDBR widely-tunable lasers will be briefly reviewed
in this section. Then recent results with lattice filter PICs will
be introduced. The first laser-based result illustrates the use of
a quantum-well intermixing (QWI) integration platform for a
40 Gb/s SGDBR-EAM transmitter, while the second two use
the dual-quantum-well platform to demonstrate wavelength
conversion at rates up to 40 Gb/s using direct photocurrent drive
of either traveling wave EA or Mach–Zehnder modulators.
Fig. 18 gives results for the QWI-based 40 Gb/s SGDBR/
EAM transmitter [53]. As indicated by the photoluminescence
plots, the initial unshifted PL peak at 1540 nm is shifted by about
35 nm for the EAM and by about 95 nm for the other ‘passive’
regions of the device, which also include the tuning sections of
the SGDBR. This dual shift is accomplished by two annealing
steps; the second is performed after removing the implanted material that supplies the diffusing vacancies from above the modulator region. (The ‘o-MQW’ photodetector region is not used
in this device.)
For the 175 m long EAM of the test device, the 3 dB bandwidth was 32 GHz, and the modulation efficiency was about

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

Fig. 19. Widely tunable, traveling-wave PD-EAM wavelength converter transparent to data format and bit rate. Photo, equivalent circuit, and eye diagrams
from 5 to 40 Gb/s [12].

20 dB/V over the 1536–1560 nm range, provided the DC bias
was properly adjusted at each wavelength. The rf modulation
was fixed at 2.5 V peak-peak for all wavelengths, and this prodB extinction (E.R.) for the 40 Gb/s eyes shown from
vided
1547 to 1565 nm.
Fig. 19 illustrates an integrated optical wavelength converter
that can also function as a transceiver, if the receive and transmit
stages are operated independently. It integrates an all-photonic
SOA-PIN receiver with an SGDBR-traveling-wave-EAM modulator [12]. The by-pass capacitor and termination resistor are
also integrated, so it can be operated without any external rf
connections.
The all-photonic receiver includes a two-stage SOA preamplifier that incorporates both high-gain and high saturation
power stages prior to a high-saturation power PIN photodiode.
A signal monitoring port is also available. For wavelength-converter operation as depicted, a transmission line directly connects the photodiode to the velocity-matched traveling-wave
EAM stage.
For the device characterized in Fig. 19, less than 2 dB of
power penalty was observed across a wavelength span of 1548
to 1560 nm for all data rates and either RZ or NRZ modulation.
led to about 1 dB of peaking in
A termination resistance
the optical-to-optical response in the 10 GHz range and a 3 dB
GHz. Input levels were
dBm, and the
bandwidth
to
dBm across the waveoutput power varied from
length range, so the device had near zero optical conversion loss.
Extinction ratios were in the 7–8 dB range. Overall power dis1–1.5 Watt range, dependent upon the tuning
sipation was
current to the SGDBR mirrors at these conditions.
The second photocurrent-driven wavelength converter
example is shown in Fig. 20. In this case a series-push-pull configured Mach–Zehnder (MZ) modulator follows the SGDBR in
the transmitter section [13].
Use of the Mach–Zehnder modulator enables better chirp
management compared to the EAM designs. A negatively
chirped output can compensate for some of the natural fiber
dispersion and extend the transmission distance. Transmission

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

Fig. 20. Widely tunable PD-MZ wavelength converter. Eyes from 1529 to 1561
nm, schematic, and SEM of flared high-saturation power SOA-PD region [13].

561

Fig. 22. Wavelength selectable laser employing quarter-wave shifted DFBs and
a 1/N combiner together with an SOA and an EAM [55].

Fig. 21. Programmable lattice filter schematic and SEM of fabricated unit cell
with expanded view of compressed MMI coupler. Data illustrates one of many
possible filter responses from a single stage [55].

up to 60 km was demonstrated with 2 dB power penalty at
10 Gb/s.
For the reported results, a termination resistor of 25 was
used, and less than 2 dB of power penalty was observed over
dBm for
the wavelength range. The output levels were
dBm.
inputs
The remaining example of a PIC that employs mostly serial
integration is the programmable lattice filter element shown in
Fig. 21. In this case no lasers are present, but it is desired to
rapidly tune and reconfigure the characteristics of complex optical filters, so the filter does include a number of SOAs, phase
shifters, and couplers, which in some cases may be variable
couplers.
Such filters may be interesting for adaptive dispersion control
or equalization, but they appear to attract most interest as agile
pre-filters for signal-processing applications. Fig. 21 shows a
possible serial lattice configuration as well as an SEM of one
unit cell of the proposed lattice filter [37]. The experimental
result superimposes a zero resulting from the Mach–Zehnder
response of the upper and lower branches with two adjacent
poles of the ring resonator within the lower branch.
GHz, and more reThe filter passband is tunable over
cent examples have illustrated flat-topped bandpass characteristics, which result from coupling several stages together, programmable both in bandwidth and center frequency [54].
C. Multichannel PICs and Other Mostly Parallel Integration
Efforts
The work emphasizing the parallel integration of a number
of channels appeared in the mid 1990s with the emergence of

Fig. 23. 8-channel receiver incorporating AWGR and PIN detector array with
2 nm channel spacing [42].

WDM. Fig. 22 shows a wavelength selectable laser [55], and
Fig. 23 shows a multi-wavelength receiver [42]. The wavelength
selectable laser, which employed a simple Star coupler with a
1/N splitting loss, later evolved into a multi-channel transmitter
by incorporating an EAM with each laser together with a lowloss multiplexer such as an AWGR.
The wavelength selectable laser in the form shown competed
with widely-tunable lasers, such as the SGDBR, by also using
heating and cooling of the substrate to thermally tune the
wavelength of the laser array to cover the wavelength ranges
over the gaps between the room temperature values of the array,
. Thus, eight or ten DFB lasers arrayed in this
way might be able to cover over a 100 WDM channels using
this approach. Such lasers are still being used in WDM systems
today [56].
Figs. 24 and 25 illustrate commercial PIC designs of Infinera
that have been available in their products for several years.
Shown are the PICs contained in their ten-channel 10 Gb/s
transmitter and receiver modules, respectively [57]. As can be
seen the transmitter PICs consist of a parallel array of ten DFB
laser-based transmitter elements that feed an AWG multiplexer.

562

Fig. 24. Schematic and output spectra of Infinera 10

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

2 10 Gb/s transmitter PIC.

2

Fig. 26. Wavelength switched 8 8 crossbar switch/router: (a) MOTOR chip
and (b) element of the wavelength converter array with various components
labeled.

Fig. 25. Schematic and superimposed response of the ten photodetectors as an
input signal is swept across the wavelength band for the Infinera 10 10 Gb/s
receiver PIC.

2

Each transmitter element contains a DFB laser that can be
tuned by a small amount, an EA-modulator, a variable optical
attenuator (VOA) to adjust the output power level, and an
optical power monitor (OPM) behind the DFB.
Infinera has also demonstrated analogous 40 40 Gb/s
research results [58], and more recently, ten-channel polarization-multiplexed differential-quaternary-phase-shift-keying
(PM-DQPSK) transmitter and receiver PICs operating at
400 Gb/s for coherent communications [59]. These latter
results will be reviewed in Section V below on Coherent PICs.
D. Serial/Parallel Integration—The MOTOR Chip
Some researchers and analysts have viewed the world of photonic integration as a complex plane with two axes: one labeled
serial integration, the other parallel integration. Thus, one might
chose to try to locate any particular PIC as some point in this
plane, dependent upon how much serial versus parallel integration technology it contained. For example, the transmitter PICs
of Figs. 6 and 18 might be considered entirely serial, the wavelength converters of Figs. 19 and 20 mostly serial with just a
little parallel (a transmitter and receiver in parallel), and the
transmitter and receiver PICs of Figs. 23 and 24 as mostly parallel with a little bit of serial.
Now more controversially, some have even argued that serial
is more interesting than parallel integration. After all, parallel is
just putting a lot of the same thing side by side, and this is what
one always does when using semiconductor planar-processing
technology. Needless to say this latter statement is a little naïve,
because in mostly parallel PICs the parallel channels are not
quite the same, they all have to work, and they ultimately are all
coupled together in some way. Nevertheless, we are amongst
those who argue that serial integration is more interesting and
sophisticated than parallel, mostly because we have tended to
do more of it.

In what follows we present a compromise position, a device
that has a large amount of serial integration but a healthy amount
of parallel integration as well. The MOnolithic Tunable Optical
Router (MOTOR) chip basically has the same architecture as
the crossbar chip proposed in Fig. 16, but it is much more sophisticated, it was actually fabricated, and it works at 40 Gb/s
[7], [14].
Fig. 26 illustrates both the MOTOR chip and the wavelength
converter elements, which in this case are nonlinear-SOA-based
wavelength converters. Although not included here, these can
include packet header rewrite modulators in each—hence, the
designation as a router. Again, an SGDBR laser within each
wavelength converter provides the wide tunability of the outputs. The particular SOA-based wavelength converter employed
uses a differential modulation technique specific to a ‘return-tozero’ (RZ) modulation format. That is, the input signal is split,
and while one half is used to unbalance the MZ-modulator to
allow light from the SGDBR to be emitted, the other is delayed a bit, and then used to rebalance the modulator to turn off
the light in order to generate a pulse. The input light changes
the index of refraction of the modulator arms by saturating the
SOAs, thereby reducing their carrier densities, and increasing
the indexes of refraction in these regions.
As illustrated in Fig. 26 the MOTOR chip employed an 8 8
AWGR, as also shown in Fig. 15 above, with 8 wavelength converters receiving 8 inputs and 8 outputs transmitted from the
AWGR. The channel spacing was 200 GHz in the 1550 nm
range. The AWGR employed waveguide tapers into and out of
the Star couplers to reduce coupling losses.
A QWI integration platform was chosen to provide active and
passive regions throughout the device. Fig. 27 gives the details
of the layer structures following the first and second epitaxial
growth steps.
There are actually two different types of ‘passive’ regions
where the quantum-wells are intermixed. Both are formed at the
same time. For the first, the unintentionally doped (UID) InP
implant buffer layer remains (as shown) to separate the optical
mode from the p-type doping in the upper cladding in order to
minimize optical losses; for the second, this implant buffer layer
is removed so that p-n junctions are formed for the modulator

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

563

Fig. 29. MOTOR chip BER and output eyes for switching from input port 3 to
any output port at 40 Gb/s RZ.

Fig. 27. (a) Initial base epitaxial growth structure. (b) Final growth structure
showing both an as-grown active MQW region and an intermixed passive MQW
region wherein the implant buffer remains.

Fig. 28. Waveguide architectures used in the MOTOR chip: (a) surface ridge
waveguide; (b) deeply etched waveguide; and (c) buried rib waveguide.

and phase-shift sections. The active sections include all of the
SOAs, the absorbers, and the gain regions of the SGDBRs.
As illustrated in Fig. 28, three different lateral waveguiding
structures are incorporated within the MOTOR chip. For most
of the wavelength converters, including the SGDBRs, the surface-ridge structure is used; for the short 11 ps “S-shaped” differential delay a deeply-etched waveguide was used to enable
the sharp bends required; and for the AWGR, a buried-rib waveguide was employed to minimize losses. Importantly, all are
formed with only a single ‘blanket’ regrowth step. The UID implant buffer was left on for both the deeply etched and buried-rib
regions to further reduce optical losses.
Chlorine-ICP dry etching is used to form the deeply-etched
waveguide after regrowth, and methane-hydrogen-RIE is
used for the slight etch into the quaternary waveguide for the
buried-rib waveguide prior to regrowth. The surface ridge is
formed by a combination of an initial ICP etch followed by
an HCl-based “clean-up” etch to expose the smooth crystallographic ridge sidewalls as well as stop-etch on the quaternary
waveguide.
An example of the MOTOR chip’s operation is shown in
Fig. 29. In this case random RZ data at 40 Gb/s is injected into

port 3, and this wavelength converter is then sequentially adjusted to translate the data to various wavelengths so that it exits
the device at each of its eight output ports.
The bit-error-rate (BER) illustrates some slight pattern dependence that appears to be related to some saturation of the
SOA preamplifiers. In other efforts, higher saturation power
SOAs have been used [60], and this probably would address
this issue. Also no anti-reflection coatings were applied to this
device and this might have contributed to some pattern effects.
dB@a BER of
for this case.
The power penalty was
Under nominal bias conditions the MOTOR chip consumed
about 2 W per channel. The signal insertion loss through the dedB, the majority of which were due to waveguide
vice was
transition and AWGR losses. Both of these numbers could be
improved with further optimization using results that have been
previously demonstrated. For example, at least 2 dB is attributed
to each of the Star couplers in the AWGR. Crosstalk values bedB with the extween channels were generally better than
ception of one input port, which appeared to suffer from some
dB.
defects that lowered its level to about
V. BACK TO THE FUTURE—COHERENT PICS
A. Motivation
Referring back to Fig. 1, it may be apparent that meeting
future demand for bandwidth is going to be a continuing
challenge. Introductions of new and expanded services, such
as HD-TV, Youtube, Facebook, programmed stock trading,
and soon 3D-TV, have continued to maintain the extreme 100x
increase/decade slope. Fig. 30 overlays some data for fiber
capacity on this total demand curve for both research and
commercial fiber links [61]. The straight lines indicate trends
for commercial systems, which show that the tremendous
growth in bandwidth, due to WDM adoption in the 1995–2002
timeframe, has now saturated due to a limitation in the number
of practical WDM channels as well as the data rate in each.
To increase fiber capacity further we are now looking to improve the spectral efficiency (SE)—the net bits/s of data rate
per Hz of bandwidth, or more simply the channel rate/channel
spacing. This is being done with advanced modulation formats
and coherent detection—really a step toward making optical
communication closer to rf. Fig. 31 gives a set of tables that
summarize the system evolution over the past few decades as

564

Fig. 30. Growth of research and commercial fiber link capacity data over the
total network demand.

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

Fig. 32. Bidirectional QPSK link schematic showing transmitter and receiver
circuits involved. I and Q outputs available from center of balanced detectors.
The QPSK 4-phase constellation is also indicated over the complex plane.

Fig. 31. System evolution, past and future.

well as what a simple extrapolation might predict for the next
[61].
As might be immediately obvious, even with an extrapolation
of the current rapid growth in fiber capacity, it does not meet the
network demand by 2020, even if doubled or tripled by using the
fiber S and L bands in addition to the standard C-band which is
plotted in Fig. 30. Even worse, calculations show that we will
due to limitations in fiber dynever be able to reach
namic range because of its limited power handling capacity [62],
seems more realistic for transmission dis[78]. An
tances
–
km, typical of WDM systems.
Having set these goals, it should be realized that even
is nontrivial. Fig. 32 shows a bidirectional
reaching
by using quaternary phase-shift
link that provides
keying (QPSK) [63]. By adding dual polarization multiplexing
, but this also
(PM-QPSK) this can be doubled to
doubles the number of components as well as requiring polarization splitters and combiners. The transmitters use a nested
pair of Mach–Zehnder modulators (MZMs) following the laser
source with one of the outputs delayed by 90 degrees before
recombining with the other. The receivers split the signal, and
after a 90 degree delay in one leg, combine both with the local
oscillator laser in 2 2 couplers which illuminate balanced
photodetector pairs. One pair provides the in-phase (I) output
and the other the quadrature-phase (Q) output.
B. Recent Telecom Experiments
Infinera has demonstrated the integration of ten QPSK
40 Gb/s transmitters consisting of DFB lasers followed by a

Fig. 33. Infinera 10-channel QPSK transmitter PIC providing 400 Gb/s output
together with received eye from one of the two I/Q channels.

Fig. 34. Bell labs DQPSK modulator photo, schematic, and receiver output.

nested MZM pair together with an AWG multiplexer. Fig. 33
gives a schematic of their chip along with an eye diagram of
one of the two received I/Q outputs [59].
Doerr, et al., have also shown that it is possible to use different
integrated modulator configurations in addition to the nested
MZMs to generate QPSK and even more advanced modulation
formats. Figs. 34 and 35 are examples. Fig. 33 shows a DQPSK
modulator that uses two asymmetrical STAR couplers together
with two EAMs to generate the 4-phase modulated constellation
[64]. Also shown is the demodulated result at 20 Gb/s for one
of the I or Q outputs.
integrated on
Fig. 35 shows a 16 QAM modulator
InP also using STAR couplers and EAMs [65].

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

Fig. 35. Bell Labs 16 QAM modulator. Photo; mask layout (stretched); and
1; BER(Q) = 9:3 10 ;
experimental constellation. 10.7 Gbaud; 2
BER(I) = very high due to shifting.

0

2

Other high-level QAM work has shown 64-QAM results
, but with a hybrid LiNbO —silica planar lightwave
circuit, again with nested MZMs [66]. Much of the recent work
on coherent appears to be aimed at reducing the basic data rates
being transmitted along the fiber as well as into and out of the
links while increasing the transmission spectral efficiency. This
enables longer fiber runs before nonlinearities and dispersions
of various kinds become problematic as well as somewhat
simpler electronics at the ends, even though there are many
more parallel elements at the ends.
Fig. 36 shows a PIC transmitter circuit recently presented by
Infinera that lowers the basic baud rate to 10 Gbaud, but adds polarization multiplexing to a 10-channel QPSK chip to get back
to the 400 Gb/s chip rate [67], similar to that of Fig. 32. This is
clearly a fairly complex chip, but it was shown to function on all
channels. Also included is the architecture of the doubly nested
MZM modulator tree together with a typical characteristic of
the InP MZMs employed.
Fig. 37 gives Infinera’s Roadmap for large-scale PIC transmitters on InP [67]. Although there are other competitive data
points that could be added from other investigators, they have
led in the area of scaling of InP-based highly-parallel transmitter
PICs for telecommunications. As can be seen they predict that
Tb/s by 2018 or so.
transmitter PICs will have capacities
It is worth mentioning at this point that 40 40 Gb/s transmitter and receiver chips were demonstrated a few years ago,
as mentioned above [58], but evidently it was found that due to
fiber transmission impairments, these were of little use in practical systems. Thus, they do not currently list this 1.6 Tb/s result
on their most recent roadmap.
C. Optical-Phase-Locked-Loops (OPLLs) Enabled by PIC
Technology
Coherent Receiver for RF Photonics Using Phase-Modulation: Microwave photonic links using intensity modulation tend

565

Fig. 36. Infinera PM-DQPSK transmitter chip concept together with a characteristic of the doubly-nested MZMs.

Fig. 37. Infinera Roadmap for large-scale DWDM transmitter PICs.

to be limited in dynamic range by the transmitter [68]. For direct
modulation of a laser the modulation speed must be kept significantly lower than the relaxation resonance frequency of the
laser, or nonlinearities result for any modest modulation depth
as the carrier density becomes unclamped. For higher frequencies external modulation must be used. Unfortunately, there are
no intensity modulators that inherently have a linear relationship between drive voltage and the optical output.
If phase modulation is used, then linear modulators do exist
with the basic linear electro-optic effect. Also, an effectively
much deeper modulation can be imparted to the optical signal
because one is not limited to simple on/off, which might be
viewed as a 180 modulation, but one in principle could modulate to many times this level to enhance the potential signal/
noise. However, now the problem of linearity in the link has
been switched to the receiver, and this is the problem addressed
by the circuit of Fig. 38 [69].

566

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

Fig. 38. Coherent receiver for phase-modulated input. Feedback from balanced
photodetector is directed to tracking modulator pair.

Fig. 39. (top) Schematic of flip-chipping of electronic and photonic ICs &
layout of PIC; (bottom) SEMs of waveguide crossing at beam splitter from top
& cross section of etched-slot beam splitter.

In Fig. 38 the negative feedback signal to the tracking modulator pair reduces the level of the interference signal on the
detectors so that the output is reduced to the linear range. The
differential pair also suppresses even order distortions that may
exist in the semiconductor modulators as well as amplitude
-modmodulation. This approach also enables the use of
ulation depth since the signals leaving the differential tracking
modulators are made to be almost in-phase even if hugely out
of phase because of a large phase modulation prior to them.
One major issue with this approach is that the tracking phase
modulators must nearly instantly track the phase deviation detected in the diode pair. Thus, the delay must be very small.
In fact, for the circuit to work in the GHz range, it has been
ps are unacceptable. This not only calls
found that delays
for monolithic integration of both the electronics and photonics,
it also demands the elimination of any unwanted signal paths
between the two. Fig. 39 illustrates the flip-chip bonding configuration that has been implemented to eliminate all additional
delays in the practical implementation of the circuit of Fig. 38.
The coupler has also been implemented as a beam-splitter to
further eliminate propagation delay in a directional coupler embodiment, which was first explored.
Initial results from this configuration are shown in Fig. 40
dB and a spur-free dy[70], [71]. A calculated link gain of
with a transmitter
namic range (SFDR) of 122 dB Hz
V and only 2.8 mA on each photodetector is found. Also,

Fig. 40. (top) Plots of fundamental and third-order distortion levels versus RF
drive power. (bottom) Output versus frequency for various photocurrents as
input power is increased.

a peak-to-peak phase modulation depth of 1.62 was used for
these results, demonstrating the ability to employ a significant
modulation depth.
With higher photocurrents it is anticipated that significantly
higher SFDRs will be obtainable. However, in the embodiment
used, there were no optical mode transformers at the inputs and
the slot beam splitters were also rather lossy, so a significant
power loss was experienced.
Phase-Locked Tunable Lasers: Loop delay is also important
for phase locking lasers together. Fig. 41 shows a chart of initial laser linewidth versus loop delay for various levels of phase
error. Explicitly shown are lines that represent the phase error
allowed for different types of digital multilevel phase and amplitude coding. The corresponding SNRs in the signal bandwidth are 9.5 dB (PSK), 12.5 dB (QPSK), 20 dB (16 QAM),
and 26.2 dB (64 QAM).
Widely tunable lasers as the SGDBR shown in Fig. 6 tend to
have inherent linewidths in the 1–3 MHz range. Fig. 41 would
ps for a correctable
indicate a need for OPLL loop delay
in a 64-QAM digital system. But, this would
error rate of
actually be a fairly distorted signal from a microwave photonics

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

Fig. 41. Laser linewidth versus OPLL loop delay to enable 10
given modulation format.

567

error rate for

perspective. Instead of an equivalent spectral efficiency of 6 bits/
symbol, we would like to see the line for 10 or 12 bits/symbol,
ps in the OPLL if
which would again require a loop delay
we started with the rather noisy SGDBR. So, again very tight
integration is called for.
Phase locking of semiconductor lasers is desired in order to
make inexpensive arrays of coherent sources for such applications as phased-array LIDAR and other optical-coherence-tomography (OCT) and imaging applications. It is also desired to
have temperature insensitive synthesized sources that are locked
to an offset from some stable reference to allow much more efficient use of the spectrum as in the rf domain. As a result, some
initial experiments have been done to demonstrate integrated
OPLLs formed from a pair of widely-tunable SGDBRs together
with most of the required optical elements.
Fig. 42 describes a heterodyne experiment in which two
SGDBR lasers are offset-locked together [72]. The circuit
schematic shows that an integrated modulator is used to generate sidebands on the mixed signal, so that the OPLL can lock
on one of these. In this case a 5 GHz fundamental offset locking
is illustrated. With deep phase modulation of the on-chip modulator it is possible to generate a number of side bands and such
GHz,
modulators can be made with bandwidths up to
so it is anticipated that such offset locking might be possible
up to the THz range without having to generate rf higher than
100 GHz.
Fundamental offset locking as high at 20 GHz was demonstrated with the current set up. Although a balanced detector
pair was available on the chip, the electronics used only had
a single-input amplifier, so only a single detector was used,
and this resulted in more AM and noise in the feedback loop
than necessary. Nevertheless, a respectable phase error varirad was measured over the 2 GHz measurement
ance
window.

Fig. 42. Circuit schematic; PIC schematic; heterodyne result; and SEM of InPbased PIC.

Fig. 43. Vision of future LIDAR system-on-a-chip [74].

Optics” (PICO) Center that involves five US universities [73].
As illustrated with OPLLs it is anticipated that both chirping
of the beam in frequency as well as sweeping it in angle will
be possible by rapid control of the offset locking as outlined
in Fig. 41. This will involve significant developments in the
control/feedback electronics as well as in the PICs themselves.
As also noted, it is anticipated that much of this work may
migrate to the hybrid-Si integration platform.

D. Future OPLL Directions
Fig. 43 illustrates a cartoon of a futuristic LIDAR
system-on-a-chip that will be one of the long-term research directions of a newly formed “Photonic Integration for Coherent

VI. SUMMARY
Some of the work that has led to current highly-functional,
high-performance photonic integrated circuits (PICs) is re-

568

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

viewed, including a few of the basic integration approaches.
A number of recent medium-to-large scale PIC examples are
presented along with a sampling of results from them. Current
work on PICs for coherent communication and sensing applications is introduced and some examples of integrated optical
phase locked loops for such applications is given. It is suggested
that there are still many significant opportunities for further
improvements in the cost, size, weight, power consumption
and performance of future systems by employing photonic
integration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the many former and present
UCSB students and colleagues that have performed much of the
work presented herein and especially the collaboration of Profs.
J. E. Bowers and D. J. Blumenthal on much of the research over
the years. Materials supplied by Dr. C. Joyner of Infinera and
Dr. C. Doerr of Acatel-Lucent are also gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] D. F. Welch, F. A. Kish, R. Nagarajan, C. H. Joyner, R. P. Schneider,
V. G. Dominic, M. L. Mitchell, S. G. Grubb, T.-K. Chiang, D. Perkins,
and A. C. Nilsson, “The realization of large-scale photonic integrated
circuits and the associated impact on fiber-optic communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 4674–4683, Dec. 2006.
[2] M. K. Smit, E. A. J. M. Bente, M. T. Hill, F. Karouta, X. J. M. Leijtens,
Y. S. Oei, J. J. G. M. van der Tol, R. Nötzel, P. M. Koenraad, H. S.
Dorren, H. de Waardt, A. M. J. Koonen, and G. D. Khoe, “Current status
and prospects of photonic IC technology,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Indium
Phosphide & Related Mater., Shimane, Japan, May 18–21, 2007, pp.
3–6.
[3] P. Bernasconi, W. Yang, L. Zhang, N. Sauer, L. Buhl, I. Kang, S. Chandrasekhar, and D. T. Neilson, “Monolithically integrated 40 Gb/s wavelength converter with multi-frequency laser,” presented at the OFC,
Anaheim, CA, Mar. 7–11, 2005, paper PDP16.
[4] J. Raring and L. Coldren, “40-Gb/s widely tunable transceivers,” IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–14, Jan./Feb.
2007.
[5] V. Lal, M. L. Masanovic, J. A. Summers, G. F. Fish, and D. J. Blumenthal, “Monolithic wavelength converters for high-speed packetswitched optical networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron.,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan./Feb. 2007.
[6] M. Dummer, M. Sysak, A. Tauke-Pedretti, J. Raring, J. Klamkin, and
L. A. Coldren, “Widely-tunable separate absorption and modulation
wavelength converter with integrated microwave termination,” J.
Lightw. Tech., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 938–944, Apr. 2008.
[7] S. C. Nicholes, M. L. Masanovic, E. Lively, L. A. Coldren, and D. J.
Blumenthal, “An 8 8 monolithic tunable optical router (MOTOR)
chip in InP,” in Proc. IPNRA, Honolulu, HI, Jul. 2009, paper IMB1.
[8] N. Kikuchi, H. Sanjoh, Y. Shibata, T. Sato, K. Tsuzuki, E. Yamada, T.
Ishibashi, and H. Yasaka, “80-Gbit/s InP DQPSK modulator with an
n-pi-n structure,” in Proc. ECOC, Berlin, Germany, Sep. 2007, paper
10.3.1.
[9] A. Ramaswamy, L. A. Johansson, J. Klamkin, H.-F. Chou, C. Sheldon,
M. J. Rodwell, L. A. Coldren, and J. E. Bowers, “Integrated coherent
receivers for high linearity microwave photonic links,” J. Lightw.
Technol., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 209–216, Jan. 2008.
[10] E. J. Norberg, R. S. Guzzon, S. C. Nicholes, J. S. Parker, and L. A.
Coldren, “Programmable photonic filters fabricated with deeply etched
waveguides,” in Proc. IPRM, Newport Beach, CA, May 2009, paper
TuB2.1.
[11] A. Agarwal, P. Toliver, R. Menendez, S. Etemad, J. Jackel, J. Young, T.
Banwell, B. E. Little, S. T. Chu, and P. Delfyett, “Fully programmable
ring-resonator-based integrated photonic circuit for phase coherent applications,” J. Lightw. Tech., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 77–87, Jan. 2006.
[12] M. Dummer, J. Klamkin, A. Tauke-Pedretti, and L. A. Coldren, “40
Gb/s field-modulated wavelength converter for all-optical packet
switching,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 15, no. 3, pp.
494–503, May/Jun. 2009.

2

[13] A. Tauke-Pedretti, M. M. Dummer, M. N. Sysak, J. S. Barton, J.
Klamkin, J. W. Raring, and L. A. Coldren, “Separate absorption
and modulation Mach–Zehnder wavelength converter,” J. Lightw.
Technol., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 91–98, Jan. 2008.
[14] S. C. Nicholes, M. L. Mašanović, B. Jevremović, E. Lively, L. A. Coldren, and D. J. Blumenthal, “An 8 8 InP monolithic tunable optical
router (MOTOR) packet forwarding Chip,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 641–650, Feb. 2010.
[15] L. A. Coldren, B. I. Miller, K. Iga, and J. A. Rentschler, “Monolithic
two-section GaInAsP/InP active-optical-resonator devices formed by
RIE,” Appl. Phys. Letts., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 315–317, Mar. 1981.
[16] E. J. Norberg, J. S. Parker, U. Krishnamachari, R. S. Guzzon, and L.
A. Coldren, “InGaAsP/InP based flattened ring resonators with etched
beam splitters,” in Proc. IPNRA, Honolulu, HI, Jul. 2009, paper IWA1.
[17] Y. Tohmori, Y. Suematsu, Y. Tushima, and S. Arai, “Wavelength
tuning of GaInAsP/InP integrated laser with butt-jointed built-in
DBR,” Electron. Lett., vol. 19, no. 17, pp. 656–657, 1983.
[18] M. Suzuki, Y. Noda, H. Tanaka, S. Akiba, Y. Kushiro, and H. Isshiki,
“Monolithic integration of InGaAsP/InP distributed feedback laser
and electroabsorption modulator by vapor phase epitaxy,” J. Lightw.
Technol., vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 1277–1285, Sep. 1987.
[19] S. B. Kim, J. S. Sim, K. S. Kim, E. D. Sim, S. W. Ryu, and H. L.
Park, “Selective-area MOVPE growth for 10 Gbit/s electroabsorption
modulator integrated with a tunable DBR laser,” J. Cryst. Growth, vol.
298, pp. 672–675, 2007.
[20] C. Jany, C. Kazmierski, J. Decobert, F. Alexandre, F. Blache, O.
Drisse, D. Carpentier, N. Lagay, F. Martin, E. Deroin, T. Johansen,
and C. Jiang, “Semi-insulating buried heterostructure 1.55 m InGaAlAs electro-absorption modulated laser with 60 GHz bandwidth,”
in Proc. ECOC, Berlin, Germany, Sep. 16–20, 2007, paper PD 2.7.
[21] Y. Yamamoto and T. Kimura, “Coherent optical fiber transmission systems,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. QE-17, no. 6, pp. 919–925, Jun.
1981.
[22] R. J. Mears, L. Reekie, I. M. Jauncey, and D. N. Payne, “Low-noise
erbium-doped fibre amplifier at 1.54 pm,” Electron. Lett., vol. 23, no.
19, pp. 1026–1028, Sep. 1987.
[23] T. L. Koch, U. Koren, R. P. Gnall, F. S. Choa, F. Hernandez-Gil, C.
A. Burrus, M. G. Yung, M. Oron, and B. I. Miller, “GaInAs/GaInAsP
multiple-quantum-well integrated heterodyne receiver,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 25, no. 24, pp. 1621–1623, Nov. 1989.
[24] N. S. Bergano and C. R. Davidson, “Wavelength division multiplexing
in long-haul transmission systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 14, no. 6,
pp. 1299–1308, Jun. 1996.
[25] Y. Kotaki and H. Ishika, “Wavelength tunable DFB and DBR lasers
for coherent optical fibre communications,” Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng.—J.,
vol. 138, no. 2, pp. 173–177, Apr. 1991.
[26] B. Mason, S. L. Lee, M. E. Heimbuch, and L. A. Coldren, “Directly
modulated sampled-grating DBR lasers for long-haul WDM communications,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 377–379, Mar.
1997.
[27] A. D. Kersey, “A review on recent developments in fiber optic sensor
technology,” Opt. Fiber Technol., vol. 2, pp. 291–317, 1996.
[28] L. A. Coldren, G. A. Fish, Y. Akulava, J. S. Barton, L. Johansson, and
C. W. Coldren, “Tunable semiconductor lasers: A tutorial,” J. Lightw.
Technol., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 193–202, Jan. 2004.
[29] V. Jayaraman, Z. Chuang, and L. A. Coldren, “Theory, design, and performance of extended tuning range semiconductor lasers with sampled
gratings,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1824–1834,
Jun. 1993.
[30] [Online]. Available: http://www.jdsu.com/products/optical-communications/products/tunable-transmission-modules.html
[31] L. A. Coldren, “Multi-Section Tunable Laser With Differing MultiElement Mirrors,” U.S. Patent 4 846 325, Jan. 1990.
[32] E. Skogen, J. W. Raring, G. B. Morrison, C. S. Wang, V. Lal, M. L.
Mašanović, and L. A. Coldren, “Monolithically integrated active components’’ a quantum-well intermixing approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Top.
Quantum Elec., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 343–355, Mar./Apr. 2005.
[33] V. M. Menon, F. Xia, and S. Forrest, “Photonic integration using asymmetric twin-waveguide (ATG) technology: Parts I & II,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 17–42, Jan./Feb. 2005.
[34] A. Tauke-Pedretti, M. N. Sysak, J. S. Barton, J. W. Raring, L. Johansson, and L. A. Coldren, “40 Gb/s series push-pull mach-zehnder
transmitter on a dual-quantum-well integration platform,” IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 18, no. 18, pp. 1922–1924, Sep. 2006.
[35] L. A. Coldren, K. Furuya, and B. I. Miller, “On the formation of planaretched facets in GaInAsP/InP double heterostructures,” J. Electrochem.
Soc., vol. 130, no. 9, pp. 1918–1926, Sep. 1983.

2

COLDREN et al.: HIGH PERFORMANCE INP-BASED PHOTONIC ICS—A TUTORIAL

[36] J. H. den Besten, M. P. Dessens, C. G. P. Herben, X. J. M. Leijtens,
F. H. Groen, M. R. Leys, and M. K. Smit, “Low-loss, compact, and
polarization independent PHASAR demultiplexer fabricated by using
a double-etch process,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 14, no. 1, pp.
62–64, Jan. 2002.
[37] E. J. Norberg, R. S. Guzzon, S. C. Nicholes, J. S. Parker, and L. A. Coldren, “Programmable photonic lattice filters in InGaAsP-InP,” IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 109–111, Jan. 2010.
[38] N. S. Lagali, M. R. Paiam, R. I. MacDonald, K. Worhof, and A.
Driessen, “Analysis of generalized Mach–Zehnder interferometers for
variable-ratio power splitting and optimized switching,” J. Lightw.
Technol., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 2542–2550, Dec. 1999.
[39] R. S. Guzzon, E. J. Norberg, J. S. Parker, and L. A. Coldren, “Highly
programmable optical filters integrated in InP-InGaAsP with tunable
inter-ring coupling,” in Proc. IPR, 2010.
[40] C. Dragone, “Efficient N N Star coupler based on Fourier optics,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 24, no. 15, pp. 942–944, Jul. 1988.
[41] C. Dragone, “An N*N optical multiplexer using a planar arrangement
of two star couplers,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 3, no. 9, pp.
812–815, Sep. 1991.
[42] J. B. D. Soole, M. R. Amersfoot, H. P. LeBlanc, N. C. Andreadakis,
A. Rajhel, and C. Caneau, “Polarisation-independent monolithic eightchannel 2 nm spacing WDM detector based on compact arrayed waveguide demultiplexer,” Electron Lett., vol. 31, no. 15, pp. 1289–1291,
1995.
[43] M. Smit and C. van Dam, “PHASAR-based WDM-devices: Principles,
design and applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol.
2, no. 2, pp. 236–250, Jun. 1996.
[44] T. Durhuus, C. Joergensen, B. Mikkelsen, and K. E. Stubkjaer, “Penalty
free all-optical wavelength conversion by SOA’s in Mach–Zehnder
configuration,” in Proc. ECOC’93, 1993, vol. 2, pp. 129–132.
[45] S. L. Danielsen et al., “A photonic WDM packet switch with reduced
complexity due to wavelength converters,” in Proc. Photon. Switching,
Salt Lake City, UT, Mar. 1995, pp. 39–41.
[46] L. A. Coldren, “Proposal to AFOSR (1995)—Later Incorporated into
MOST,” 1996–2000.
[47] S. J. B. Yoo, “Wavelength conversion technologies for WDM network
applications,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 955–966, Jun.
1996.
[48] Y.-H. Jan, G. Fish, L. A. Coldren, and S. DenBaars, “40 nm tuning
range of a photonic integrated tunable InP/InGaAsP receiver with
improved side-lobe suppression ratios,” in Proc. IEEE LEOS Annu.
Meeting, San Francisco, CA, Nov. 1997, pp. 322–323.
[49] J. M. Hutchinson, J. A. Henness, L. A. Johansson, J. S. Barton, M. L.
Mashanovitch, and L. A. Coldren, “2.5 Gb/s wavelength conversion
using monolithically-integrated photodetector and directly-modulated
widely-tunable SGDBR laser,” in Proc. LEOS, Tucson, AZ, Oct. 2003,
paper WU4.
[50] J. S. Barton, M. L. Mašanović, M. N. Sysak, E. J. Skogen, J.
M. Hutchinson, D. J. Blumenthal, and L. A. Coldren, “A novel
monolithically-integrated widely-tunable wavelength converter based
on a SGDBR-SOA-MZ transmitter and integrated photodetector,”
in Proc. Photon. Switching, Versailles, France, Sep. 2003, paper
PS.MoA9.
[51] M. L. Masanovitch, V. Lal, J. S. Barton, E. J. Skogen, L. A. Coldren,
and D. J. Blumenthal, “Monolithically-integrated Mach–Zehnder interferometer wavelength converter and widely tunable laser in InP,”
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 1117–1119, Aug.
2003.
[52] M. L. Mashanovitch, E. Burmeister, M. M. Dummer, B. Koch, S. C.
Nicholes, J. S. Barton, B. Jevremovic, K. Nguyen, V. Lal, J. E. Bowers,
L. A. Coldren, and D. J. Blumenthal, “Advanced photonic integrated
technologies for optical routing and switching,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 7219,
no. 0l, Feb. 2009.
[53] J. W. Raring, L. A. Johansson, E. J. Skogen, M. N. Sysak, H. N.
Poulsen, S. P. DenBaars, and L. A. Coldren, “40 Gb/s widely-tunable low-drive voltage electroabsorption-modulated transmitters,” J.
Lightw. Technol., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 239–248, Jan. 2007.
[54] E. J. Norberg, R. S. Guzzon, J. S. Parker, L. A. Johansson, and L. A.
Coldren, “A monolithic programmable optical filter for RF signal processing,” in Proc. MWP, Oct. 2010.
[55] M. G. Young, U. Koren, B. I. Miller, M. Chien, T. L. Koch, D. M.
Tennant, K. Feder, K. Dreyer, and G. Raybon, “Six wavelength laser
array with integrated amplifier and modulator,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31,
no. 21, pp. 1835–1836, Oct. 1995.

2

569

[56] H. Hatakeyama, K. Naniwae, K. Kudo, N. Suzuki, S. Sudo, S. Ae,
Y. Muroya, K. Yashiki, S. Satoh, T. Morimoto, K. Mori, and T.
Sasaki, “Wavelength-selectable microarray light sources for S-, C-,
and L-band WDM systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, no.
7, pp. 903–905, Jul. 2003.
[57] R. Nagarajan, C. H. Joyner, R. P. Schneider, Jr., J. S. Bostak, T.
Butrie, A. G. Dentai, V. G. Dominic, P. W. Evans, M. Kato, M.
Kauffman, D. J. H. Lambert, S. K. Mathis, A. Mathur, R. H. Miles,
M. L. Mitchell, M. J. Missey, S. Murthy, A. C. Nilsson, F. H. Peters, S. C. Pennypacker, J. L. Pleumeekers, R. A. Salvatore, R. K.
Schlenker, R. B. Taylor, H.-S. Tsai, M. F. Van Leeuwen, J. Webjorn, M. Ziari, D. Perkins, J. Singh, S. G. Grubb, M. S. Reffle, D.
G. Mehuys, F. A. Kish, and D. F. Welch, “Large scale photonic integrated circuits,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 50–65, Jan./Feb. 2005.
[58] R. Nagarajan, M. Kato, J. Pleumeekers, P. Evans, D. Lambert, A. Chen,
V. Dominic, A. Mathur, P. Chavarkar, M. Missey, A. Dentai, S. Hurtt,
J. Bäck, R. Muthiah, S. Murthy, R. Salvatore, C. Joyner, J. Rossi, R.
Schneider, M. Ziari, H.-S. Tsai, J. Bostak, M. Kauffman, S. Pennypacker, T. Butrie, M. Reffle, D. Mehuys, M. Mitchell, A. Nilsson, S.
Grubb, F. Kish, and D. Welch, “Large-scale photonic integrated circuits for long-haul transmission and switching,” J. Opt. Netw., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 102–111, Feb. 2007.
[59] S. W. Corzine, P. Evans, M. Kato, G. He, M. Fisher, M. Raburn, A.
Dentai, I. Lyubomirsky, R. Nagarajan, M. Missey, V. Lal, A. Chen,
J. Thomson, W. Williams, P. Chavarkar, S. Nguyen, D. Lambert, T.
Butrie, M. Reffle, R. Schneider, M. Ziari, C. Joyner, S. Grubb, F. Kish,
and D. Welch, “10-channel 40 Gb/s per channel DQPSK monolithically integrated InP-based transmitter PIC,” in Proc. OFC, San Diego,
CA, Feb. 2008, paper PDP18.
[60] J. Raring, E. J. Skogen, M. L. Mašanović, S. P. DenBaars, and L.
A. Coldren, “Demonstration of high saturation power/high gain SOAs
using quantum well intermixing based integration platform,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 41, no. 24, pp. 1345–1346, Nov. 2005.
[61] R. Tkach, “Optical network capacity: From glut to scarcity,” in Proc.
OIDA Annu. Meeting, Santa Clara, CA, Dec. 1–2, 2009.
[62] R. Essiambre et al., “Optical communications—A view to the future,”
in Proc. ECOC, Brussels, Belgium, Sep. 2008.
[63] B. Mason, in Proc. OIDA Annu. Meeting, Santa Clara, CA, Dec. 2009.
[64] C. R. Doerr, L. Zhang, A. L. Adamiecki, N. J. Sauer, J. H. Sinsky,
and P. J. Winzer, “Compact EAM-based InP DQPSK modulator and
demonstration at 80 Gb/s,” in Proc. OFC, Anaheim, CA, Mar. 25–29,
2007, paper PDP33.
[65] C. R. Doerr, P. J. Winzer, L. Zhang, L. L. Buhl, and N. J. Sauer, “Monolithic InP 16-QAM modulator,” in Proc. OFC, San Diego, CA, Feb. 24,
2008, paper PDP20.
[66] A. Sano, T. Kobayashi, K. Ishihara, H. Masuda, S. Yamamoto, K.
Mori, E. Yamazaki, E. Yoshida, Y. Miyamoto, T. Yamada, and H.
Yamazaki, “240-Gb/s polarization-multiplexed 64-QAM modulation
and blind detection using PLC-LN hybrid integrated modulator and
digital coherent receiver,” in Proc. ECOC, Vienna, Austria, Sep.
20–24, 2009, paper PD2.2.
[67] C. Joyner, P. Evans, S. Corzine, M. Kato, M. Fisher, J. Gheorma, V.
Dominic, P. Samra, A. Nilsson, J. Rahn, A. Dentai, P. Studenkov, M.
Missey, D. Lambert, R. Muthiah, R. Salvatore, S. Murthy, E. Strzelecka, J. Pleumeekers, A. Chen, R. Schneider, R. Nagarajan, M. Ziari,
J. Stewart, F. Kish, and D. Welch, “Current view of large scale photonic
integrated circuits on Indium phosphide,” in Proc. OFC, San Diego,
CA, Mar. 21–25, 2010, paper OWD3.
[68] C. Cox, Analog Optical Links: Theory and Practice. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[69] H. F. Chou, A. Ramaswamy, D. Zibar, L. A. Johansson, J. E. Bowers,
M. Rodwell, and L. A. Coldren, Fellow, “High-linearity coherent receiver with feedback,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 19, no. 12, pp.
940–942, Jun. 2007.
[70] A. Ramaswamy, L. A. Johansson, U. Krishnamachari, S. Ristic, C.-H.
Chen, M. Piels, A. Bhardwaj, L. A. Coldren, M. J. Rodwell, and J. E.
Bowers, “Demonstration of a linear ultra-compact integrated coherent
receiver,” in Proc. MWP, Oct. 2010.
[71] U. Krishnamachari, S. Ristic, A. Ramaswamy, L. A. Johansson, C.-H.
Chen, J. Klamkin, M. Piels, A. Bhardwaj, M. J. Rodwell, J. E. Bowers,
and L. A. Coldren, “An ultra-compact integrated coherent receiver for
high-linearity RF-photonic links,” in Proc. MWP, Oct. 2010.
[72] S. Ristic, A. Bhardwaj, M. J. Rodwell, L. A. Coldren, and L. A. Johansson, “An optical phase-locked loop photonic integrated circuit,” J.
Lightw. Technol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 526–538, Feb. 2010.

2

570

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 29, NO. 4, FEBRUARY 15, 2011

[73] L. Coldren, J. Bowers, M. Rodwell, L. Johansson, A. Yariv, T. Koch,
J. Campbell, and R. Ram, Photonic Integration for Coherent Optics
(PICO) part of DARPA CIPHER program, 2010.
[74] Schematic supplied by A. Yariv as part of PICO project.
[75] E. Skogen, J. Barton, S. Denbaars, and L. A. Coldren, “A
quantum-well-intermixing process for wavelength-agile photonic
integrated circuits,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 8, no.
4, pp. 863–869, Jul./Aug. 2002.
[76] M. Smit, “New focusing and dispersive planar component based on an
optical phased array,” Electron. Lett., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 385–386, Mar.
1988.
[77] Y.-H. Jan, G. Fish, L. A. Coldren, and S. DenBaars, “Widely tunable
integrated filter/receiver with apodized grating-assisted codirectional
coupler,” in Proc. SPIE Photon. West, San Jose, CA, Jan. 1998, paper
3290–232.
[78] R.-J. Essiambre, G. Kramer, P. J. Winzer, G. J. Foschini, and B. Goebel,
“Capacity limits of optical fiber networks,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 662–701, Feb. 2010.

Larry A. Coldren (S’67–M’72–SM’77–F’82)
received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1972.
He is the Fred Kavli Professor of Optoelectronics
and Sensors and Acting Richard A. Auhll Dean of
Engineering at the University of California, Santa
Barbara (UCSB). After 13 years in the research
area at Bell Laboratories, he joined UCSB in
1984, where he now holds appointments with the
Department of Materials and the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering. In 1990, he
cofounded Optical Concepts, later acquired as Gore Photonics, to develop novel
VCSEL technology, and, in 1998, he cofounded Agility Communications,
later acquired by JDSU, to develop widely-tunable integrated transmitters. At
Bell Labs, he initially worked on waveguided surface-acoustic-wave signal
processing devices and coupled-resonator filters. He later developed tunable
coupled-cavity lasers using novel reactive-ion etching (RIE) technology that
he created for the then new InP-based materials. At UCSB, he continued
work on multiple-section tunable lasers, in 1988 inventing the widely-tunable
multi-element mirror concept, which is now used in some JDSU products.
Near this same time period, he also made seminal contributions to efficient
vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) designs that continue to be
implemented in practical devices to this day. More recently, his group has
developed high-performance InP-based photonic integrated circuits (PICs)
as well as high-speed VCSELs, and they continue to advance the underlying
materials growth and fabrication technologies. He has authored or coauthored
over a thousand journal and conference papers, seven book chapters and one
textbook and has been issued 63 patents. He has presented dozens of invited
and plenary talks at major conferences.
Prof. Coldren is a Fellow of the IEE and a member of the National Academy
of Engineering. He was a recipient of the 2004 John Tyndall and 2009 Aron
Kressel Awards.

Steven C. Nicholes received the B.S. degree in
chemical engineering from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in
materials from the University of California, Santa
Barbara (UCSB), in 2009.
At UCSB, his research focused on the design, growth and fabrication of widely tunable
semiconductor lasers and semiconductor optical
amplifiers for large-scale photonic integrated circuits. In 2009, he joined Aurrion, LLC, Santa
Barbara, where he focuses on the design of silicon
photonic integrated circuits.

Leif Johansson (M’04) received the Ph.D. degree
in engineering from University College London,
London, U.K., in 2002.
He is currently a Research Scientist with the
University of California, Santa Barbara. His current
research interests include design and characterization of integrated photonic devices for analog and
digital applications and analog photonic systems and
subsystems.

Sasa Ristic (M’02) received the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from the
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, in 2007.
He has been a Post-doctoral Fellow with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of California, Santa Barbara, since 2007,
supported in part by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
His current research interests include design, fabrication, and characterization of integrated photonic
devices and their applications.

Robert S. Guzzon received the B.S. degrees in electrical engineering and physics from Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, in 2007. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at
the University of California, Santa Barbara.
His interests include large-scale photonic integration, particularly applied to microwave photonic
signal processing. His current work focuses on the
design and fabrication of versatile microwave filter
systems to achieve improved tunability and noise
performance.

Erik J. Norberg received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in engineering nanoscience from Lund University,
Lund, Sweden, in 2008. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at
the University of California, Santa Barbara.
His past research experience includes MOCVD
growth and characterization of InP-based nanowires.
He is currently working on the development of
monolithically integrated programmable optical
filters.

Uppiliappan Krishnamachari received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, in 2005. He
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering at the University of California,
Santa Barbara.
His research interests include the design, fabrication, and characterization of InP-based photonic integrated circuits incorporating nanophotonic devices.
His current efforts are focused on integrated coherent
receivers using ultra-compact trench waveguide couplers for high linearity microwave photonic links.

