82 Technology focus: Etch

Dry etching of InP-based
materials using a highdensity ICP plasma system
Ligang Deng of Oxford Instruments
Plasma Technology outlines how
inductively coupled plasma technology
can provide fast, accurate, low-damage
etching of indium phosphide materials.

D

ry etching is now widely used in the fabrication
of optoelectronic and electronic devices involving III-V materials, due to the need for careful
control of the critical dimensions of components. Fast
etch rates, repeatability, uniformity, clean chemistries,
vertical profile and low device damage are some of the
most desirable aspects of the etching processes.
Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching is ideally
suited to these requirements, since it provides high
ion densities and hence fast etch rates, while allowing
separate control of ion density and ion energy (giving
a low damage capability).
To meet these demands, Oxford Instruments Plasma
Technology (OIPT) has developed a wide range of ICP
etch processes for III-V semiconductors. This article
focuses on etching processes for InP and
related materials, discussing various etching
chemistries and system requirements for different applications and providing an update of the
latest new process developing results.

Gas inlet with axially
symmetric distribution

Viewport for optical
emission spectroscopy
or laser interferometry

Quartz or
alumina tube

Electrostatic
shield

Water-cooled
RF coil antenna

205mm
diameter cryocooled/heated
lower
electrode with
heliumassisted heat
transfer

Wafer
clamping
mechanism
Sputter
shield

200mm diameter
high conductance
pumping port

Figure 1. Schematic of PlasmaPro 100 ICP180.

is monitored by measurement of the DC bias generated
on the lower electrode, and is controlled mainly by the
RF power supplied to this electrode.

1. The ICP tool
The system used for these processes is Oxford
Instruments Plasma Technology’s PlasmaPro
100 ICP etcher (OIPT CS1 hardware).
A schematic of the etch chamber is given in
Figure 1 and the full system is shown in
Figure 2.
RF power (13.56MHz) is applied to both the
ICP source (up to 3000 Watts) and substrate
electrode (up to 600 Watts) to generate the
etch plasma. An electrostatic shield around the
ICP tube is used to ensure that the ICP power
is purely inductively coupled (i.e. ‘true-ICP’),
hence eliminating sputtering of tube material
and minimizing unnecessary high-energy ion
damage to devices. Ion energy at the substrate Figure 2. PlasmaPro 100 ICP180.
semiconductor TODAY Compounds&AdvancedSilicon • Vol. 7 • Issue 10 • December 2012/January 2013

www.semiconductor-today.com

Technology focus: Etch 83

Figure 3. InP-based material etched using CH4/H2/Cl2 process. Etch rates of >1.5µm/min and selectivity of
>15:1 is achieved.

Wafers are loaded into the chamber via a load lock to
maintain good stability of chamber vacuum and hence
repeatability of etching results.
The wafers being etched are either mechanically or
electrostatically clamped to the temperature-controlled
lower electrode. Helium is applied to the back of the
wafers to provide good thermal conductance between
the chuck and the wafer.
Through the use of electrical heater elements and a
coolant circulating circuit, the PlasmaPro 100 ICP has
control of substrate table temperature to an accuracy
of ±1°C over a temperature range of –5°C to +400°C.
Substrate temperature has a marked effect on the etch
result, as it controls the volatility of the etch species
and hence influences the chemical component of the
process, affecting not only etch rate, selectivity and
profile but also surface roughness. The system can be
operated over a pressure range from 1mT to 100mT,
allowing accurate control process chamber pressure.

2. InP-based material etching

used CH4/H2 process increases. However, profile
control becomes difficult due to increased undercutting.
Addition of Cl2 to this mixture allows highly anisotropic
etch profiles, due to the low volatility of InClx. This
therefore allows accurate profile control through
adjustment of the CH4/Cl2 ratio. Etch rates of
>1.5µm/min and selectivity of >15:1 to SiO2 or SiNx
masks can be achieved. Figure 3 shows a 10µm-deep
mirror facet etched using this chemistry.
This chemistry has the advantage that it etches a
wide range of materials, i.e. those containing In, P,
Ga, As, Al, Sb etc, with low selectivity (~0.5–1:1)
between each other, hence etched profiles have no
notching at interfaces between materials. It also
produces less polymer contamination than the CH4/H2
chemistry due to the lower CH4 content of this process
and much faster etch rate. There is no additional wafer
heating required, as the InP-based wafer is heated
solely by the high-density plasma itself. With accurate
control of the plasma parameters, process repeatability is better than ±3%, and no wafer clamping is
required.
This technique enables batch processing for highthroughput production applications (e.g. 4x2” wafers
loaded per run), since the wafers can simply rest on a
carrier plate and do not need to be individually
clamped and helium cooled. Another variant of this
process is the CH4/Ar/Cl2 chemistry, which has also

2.1 High-rate etching of waveguide and mirror facet
For high-rate etching of mirror facets and waveguides,
the key requirements are fast etch rates to depths of
up to 10µm and 5µm respectively, controllable etch
depth, highly anisotropic profile, no notching at buried
layers of InGaAsP (or similar), and smooth sidewalls
and etched surface.
CH4/H2/Cl2 chemistry
is the most effective
Table1. CH4/H2/Cl2 process performance summary.
process for this kind
Etch rate
Selectivity Etched Etched surface
of application. If the
(nm/min)
to
SiO2
profile and sidewall
Uniformity
temperature of the
wafer is allowed to
Single 2” wafer
1500
15:1
90º±1
smooth
<±2.5%
increase to near
Single 4” wafer
500
8
90º±1
smooth
<±4.0%
200ºC, then the etch
Batch 4x2” wafers
500
8
90º±1
smooth
<±5.0%
rate of the commonly
www.semiconductor-today.com

semiconductor TODAY Compounds&AdvancedSilicon • Vol. 7 • Issue 10 • December 2012/January 2013

84 Technology focus: Etch

Figure 4. Cl2/N2 etched waveguide.

Figure 5. HBr waveguide etch.

been shown to produce excellent etch results using this
etch equipment.
However, often the demands of production dictate that
the chamber must stay as clean as possible, ideally
with no polymer deposition, even at the expense of the
etch anisotropy and sidewall smoothness if necessary.
This requires that the process does not contain CH4.
A common approach is to use a Cl2-based etch
chemistry with a heated electrode (≥150ºC, in order to
effectively remove the InClx etch product from the
wafer surface). Accurate wafer temperature control
is recommended for this process. If the sample temperature rises excessively, the InClx evaporates from
the surface easily and hence produces undercutting.
On the other hand, at too low a temperature, InClx is
non-volatile, resulting in slow etch rates, low selectivity
and surface roughness. Often N2 is added to increase
the physical component of the etching and to passivate
the surface, hence reducing surface roughness and
improving profile control. Using this process, etch rates

of >1µm/min and selectivity to SiO2 of >10:1 have
been achieved. Figure 4 shows a typical 5µm-deep
etch result. This is a H+-free process, which may create
less damage to the device, as H+ often forms a passvation layer under the etched surface that may affect
device performance.
The CH4/H2/Cl2 and Cl2/N2 processes listed above can
also be used to create device mesas, with either vertical
or sloped profiles achieved by suitably adjusting
process parameters.
An alternative technique that allows processing at
lower temperatures
The HBr process can also of ~100–150ºC
etch InP with photoresist involves the use of
HBr chemistry, since
as a mask, since it
the etch product of
requires lower
InBrx becomes
temperature compared
volatile at a lower
to Cl2 chemistry
temperature than
InClx. Figure 5
shows a typical 5µm-deep etch result at an etch rate of
0.8µm/min and a selectivity of >10:1 to SiO2. Again,
good temperature control is recommended due to the
sensitivity of etch results to wafer temperature.
The HBr process can also etch InP with photoresist
(PR) as a mask, as shown in Figure 6, since it requires
lower temperature compared to Cl2 chemistry. Typically
an etch rate of >1µm/min and a selectivity of 14:1 are
achieved. This process required hard baking of the
photoresist mask before etching in order to reduce
photoresist burning. Advantages of this process include
potential elimination of the use of hard masks and
significantly reduced process complexity and cost.
A Cl2/H2 process has been developed recently. In this
process, the lower electrode is set at room temperature.
The wafer is placed on top of a carrier wafer without
additional thermal contact, or wafer clamping. The
etch mechanism is similar to that of the CH4/H2/Cl2

Figure 6. InP etches using photoresists as a mask.

semiconductor TODAY Compounds&AdvancedSilicon • Vol. 7 • Issue 10 • December 2012/January 2013

www.semiconductor-today.com

Technology focus: Etch 85

Figure 7. InP/InGaAs sample etched using Cl2/H2 process at room temperature.

Figure 8 CH4/H2 grating etch.

process — the wafer is heated by the plasma itself.
The advantage of this process is the absence of CH4,
therefore no polymer deposits in the chamber. It is a
clean and also environmental friendly process. In this
process, the gas ratio of Cl2/H2 is very important. High
gas ratio leads to a high etch rate but also gives an
undercut etching profile. Figure 7 shows the results of
Cl2/H2 etch in ICP mode. The etch rate is 850nm/min
with selectivity to nitride mask of > 10:1.
2.2 InP grating etching or shallow etching
Although the CH4/H2 InP etching process can be
replaced by faster, cleaner etch chemistries in ICP
mode for the majority of applications, it is still widely
used for InP DFB (distributed feedback laser) grating
etching, due to the requirements of shallow and
accurately controlled etch depth (typically <200nm).
Also, the frequent use of photoresist masks (often
delicate e-beam resists) for grating definition requires
room-temperature etching. In an ICP tool this process

Figure 9. Shallow InP etch using CH4/H2 in RIE mode process: (a) single-step process showing some polymer
deposit on etched top surface and sidewall; (b) two-step process, no more polymer residual on etched surface.
www.semiconductor-today.com

semiconductor TODAY Compounds&AdvancedSilicon • Vol. 7 • Issue 10 • December 2012/January 2013

86 Technology focus: Etch

Figure 10: Single 3” wafer shallow InP etch using
CH4/H2 in ICP mode process, photoresist as a mask.

following the etching in order to remove the residual
polymer. Figure 9 shows the result of a RIE-mode shallow InP etch to a depth of less than 1000nm at an etch
rate of 20~40nm/min.
Due to the slow etch rate, the throughput is low in the
RIE-mode process. Therefore, sometimes CH4/H2 etching
in ICP mode is required in order to increase etch rate.
Typically, using this type of chemistry to etch a single
3” wafer achieves an etch rate of 100nm/min, a selectivity to PR mask of >10:1, and a uniformity of ±3%
with a profile >80º, as shown in Figure 10.
Working with Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute
(FhG HHI) we have developed a batch process for
three 3” wafers on a ICP380 tool. This process gives an
etch rate of 100nm/min, a selectivity to PR mask of
>10:1, and a uniformity of ±3% across wafer with a
profile >80º, as shown in Figure 11 (profiles are taken
at the centre and edge of the wafer/carrier).
As can be seen, there is excellent process uniformity
and etch rate over the three wafers using this CH4/H2based process chemistry. With an etch rate in the range
of 100nm/min (10 times slower compared with chlorinecontaining processes), it can be used for applications
where accurate control of the etched depth is required
while maintaining a reasonably short processing time.

is typically performed with no ICP power (i.e. only
lower electrode power is applied), enabling a slow
‘RIE mode’ of etching. Figure 8 shows the result of a
RIE-mode grating etch in an ICP tool to a depth of
100nm at an etch rate of 20nm/min.
CH4/H2 process in RIE mode is used for shallow InP
etch (etched depth less
than 1000nm). Since it is a Table2. CH4/H2 process performance summary.
room-temperature
Batch Etch rate Selectivity to Etched
process, photoresist can be
size
(nm/min) photo-resist
profile
used as mask. However,
CH4/H2 forms a large
ICP CH4/H2 1x 2”
125
>10:1
>80º
amount of polymer in the
1x 3”
110
>10:1
>80º
chamber and also forms a
3x3”
100
>10:1
>80º
deposit at the etched top
RIE CH4/H2 1x2”
20
>10:1
>80º
surface and sidewall.
1x3”
15
>10:1
>80º
Often a short O2 clean step
3x3”
12
>10:1
>80º
is added into the process

Uniformity (crosswafer or batch)
<±3%
<±3%
<±5%
<±2%
<±3%
<±4%

Figure 11 Batch 3x3”-wafer shallow InP etch using CH4/H2 in an ICP-mode process, with photoresist as a
mask (with kind permission of FGH HHI.)

semiconductor TODAY Compounds&AdvancedSilicon • Vol. 7 • Issue 10 • December 2012/January 2013

www.semiconductor-today.com

Technology focus: Etch 87

Figure 12. Controllable etch rate for shallow etching.

The results for CH4/H2 processes in both RIE and ICP
modes are listed in Table 2.
CH4/H2/Cl2, Cl2/N2 and HBr in ICP-mode processes
can also be used for shallow etch. If the sample is preheated to above 150ºC by the lower electrode, it has
been shown that it is possible to reduce the etch rate

from >1μm/min to 0.2μm/min by choosing low ICP
power. A typical etched profile is shown in Figure 12.
2.3 InP photonic crystal (PhC) etching
The etching of an InP photonic crystal waveguide
structure is very challenging, since it requires a high
aspect ratio with feature sizes of less than 0.5µm.
The most common structure is two-dimensional arrays
of holes.
All InP etch processes mentioned above can be
employed to etch PhC. P Strasser from ZTH Zurich
developed an etching process using the ICP180 tool.
The conclusion from his work is that Cl2/N2/Ar is the
best chemistry for PhC etch. This is a polymer-free
process, and can also provide a square foot. The
wafer temperature is set at above 200ºC. Cl2 is the
etch gas, Ar is used as a dilute gas, and N2 gives
passivation at the sidewall. An aspect ratio of >15:1
was achieved. Figure 12 shows an etched depth of
2.9µm, and an etch rate of 1.75µm/min achieved for
190nm diameter holes, which gives an aspect ratio of
~16:1. The small sample pieces have to be glued on to
the carrier plate and backside helium cooling is
required.

3. Summary
InP-based material etching is a vital technology for the
fabrication of optoelectronic and electronic devices.
OIPT’s PlasmaPro 100 ICP etcher (OIPT CS1 hardware)
provides a wide range of III-V material etching
solutions. Highly vertical (or controlled slope) etched
profiles, smooth sidewalls, with good selectivity to
oxide, nitride or a PR mask, as well as a controllable
etch rate, can be achieved. ■
Figure 13. PhC etched in InP. The holes have a
diameter of 180nm, and the etched depth is 2.9µm
(with kind permission of P Strasser etc,
Communication Photonics Group, ETH Zurich).
www.semiconductor-today.com

Author:
Dr Ligang Deng, Principal Applications Engineer,
Oxford Instruments Plasma Technology
www.oxford-instruments.com/plasma

semiconductor TODAY Compounds&AdvancedSilicon • Vol. 7 • Issue 10 • December 2012/January 2013

