Fabrication techniques for grating-based optical devices
Michael H. Lim,a) T. E. Murphy, J. Ferrera, J. N. Damask, and Henry I. Smith
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

共Received 1 June 1999; accepted 24 August 1999兲
We describe a novel, versatile process for fabricating integrated Bragg-grating devices. Our process
addresses many of the critical challenges presented by such devices, including period selection,
alignment, spatial coherence, and nanolithography. Using a combination of e-beam, x-ray, optical,
and interference lithographies, we have successfully employed this process to construct 244 nm
period, quarter-wave-shifted Bragg gratings on top of 1-␮ m-tall waveguide structures in InP.
© 1999 American Vacuum Society. 关S0734-211X共99兲07206-6兴

I. INTRODUCTION

II. FABRICATION CHALLENGES

The term ‘‘Bragg grating’’ refers to an optical device in
which a periodic index modulation or structural corrugation
reflects light in a narrow wavelength range. The principle of
operation is similar to that of a dielectric mirror, in which a
periodic sequence of films, of alternating index, is used to
achieve high reflectivity over a narrow bandwidth.
Because of their ability to selectively reflect certain wavelengths, Bragg gratings find widespread application in the
rapidly growing field of optical telecommunications, especially in wavelength-division multiplexing 共WDM兲. For example, in distributed-feedback lasers, Bragg gratings are
used in place of mirrors or facets to provide wavelengthdependent feedback into the lasing medium.1 Fiber Bragg
gratings, in which a periodic index modulation is induced in
the core of a photosensitive optical fiber, are now employed
for a variety of applications, including dispersion compensation and wavelength add/drop filters.2
Relatively sophisticated optical filters can be constructed
using Bragg gratings. By changing the pitch and/or modulation depth of the grating across the length of the device, it is
possible to tailor the spectral response of the device. Also, by
introducing one or more quarter-wave shifts into the grating,
it is possible to construct a rich variety of resonator-based
filters, from simple Lorentzian bandpass filters to higherorder Butterworth filters.3,4
Despite the flexibility afforded by Bragg gratings, their
application in integrated-optical devices has been limited to
relatively simple components, in part because of the technical challenges in fabricating such structures. In this work, we
call attention to these unique challenges and present a process sequence which solves some of the critical problems.
The device we are building to demonstrate these techniques is the channel-dropping filter 共CDF兲, depicted in Fig.
1.5 The function of the CDF is to drop 共or add兲 one wavelength channel from a multichannel bus. The filtering takes
place in the quarter-wave-shifted Bragg gratings located
above and below the bus waveguide. Because of the
wavelength-selective nature of the Bragg gratings, they act
as narrowband resonators, which are only excited by one
resonant wavelength channel.

The first challenge presented by the channel-dropping filter depicted in Fig. 1 is that the grating period is ⬃244 nm,
which is beyond the capability of most conventional lithography techniques. Moreover, the presence of an abrupt
quarter-wave shift in the grating rules out the use of interference lithography, which otherwise could be used to produce
such gratings. In order to fabricate grating filters that include
one or more quarter-wave shifts, a more flexible lithography
tool, such as electron-beam lithography, must be employed.
A second requirement of the Bragg grating, which is not
apparent from Fig. 1, is that the grating must be spatially
coherent over its entire length; the Bragg grating is several
hundred microns in extent, and therefore must be written by
stitching together several e-beam fields. Any appreciable
field-stitching errors at the boundaries between these adjacent e-beam fields results in a phase error in the Bragg grating. Stochastic modeling has shown that one must hold the
field-stitching error to ⭐5 nm or else the resulting phase
errors cause several deleterious effects in filter function.6
For the channel-dropping filter, and more generally for all
Bragg-grating-based filters, the operating frequency is determined by the grating period. Therefore, in order to build a
narrowband filter for a WDM system, we must maintain precise control of the Bragg-grating period. To illustrate this
requirement, consider two consecutive wavelength channels
in a dense WDM system, separated in optical frequency by
100 GHz. If our filter is to operate on one of these channels
without affecting the other, the period of the Bragg grating
must be controlled to within 0.1 nm. In the following section,
we describe a technique for reliably measuring and selecting
the Bragg period to within 0.1 nm.
Two levels of lithography are required for fabricating the
channel-dropping filter shown in Fig. 1: one that defines the
waveguide features and a second that defines the fine-pitch
gratings on top of the waveguide. Naturally, these two levels
of lithography must be aligned relative to one another. In
addition to the normal requirements of pattern overlay, the
Bragg grating must be oriented such that its features are precisely perpendicular to the direction of the waveguides, i.e.,
the k-vector of the grating must be precisely aligned to the
waveguide axis. Any angular misalignment between the grating and the waveguide axes will cause an effective lengthen-

a兲

Electronic mail: mhl@nano.mit.edu

3208

J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 17„6…, Nov/Dec 1999

0734-211X/99/17„6…/3208/4/$15.00

©1999 American Vacuum Society

3208

3209

Lim et al.: Techniques for grating-based optical devices

FIG. 1. Schematic of the channel-dropping filter in InP. The quarter-waveshifted Bragg gratings act as wavelength-selective resonators which separate
one wavelength channel from a multiwavelength bus waveguide. The lower
portion of this figure illustrates the structure and dimensions of the device. A
final layer of InP cladding 共not depicted兲 is deposited over the entire structure to complete the device.

ing of the grating period. Thus, in order to precisely control
the operating frequency of the filter, not only must we precisely control the Bragg period as described above, but we
must also maintain angular alignment between the grating
and the underlying waveguide patterns.
Another challenge presented by the channel-dropping filter is that the fine-period grating structures must be patterned
on top of relatively tall waveguide structures. Attempting to
spin a coating of high-resolution photoresist onto a substrate
with 1.1-␮ m-tall features invariably results in uneven resist
coverage, which leads in turn to unreliable patterning. In
order to avoid this topography problem, we have developed a
technique that we call the dual-layer-hardmask process
共DLHP兲 which we detail in the following sections.
Finally, once the structure is fabricated, a final layer of
InP cladding must be deposited, while maintaining the underlying structure of the device.
III. MASK FABRICATION
In constructing the channel-dropping filter, we use a combination of several lithographies. We use optical-contact
photolithography to print the relatively coarse (⬃1 ␮ m兲
waveguide features, and we use x-ray nanolithography to
pattern the fine-period Bragg gratings. The optical photomasks which define the waveguide features were written by a
commercial mask shop using a MEBES tool, and the x-ray
masks used for the grating features were written with our
customized VS2A electron-beam-lithography system.
In generating the x-ray masks required for the channeldropping filter, we use a technique called spatial-phaselocked e-beam lithography 共SPLEBL兲,4,7,8 which combines
the long-range spatial coherence of interference lithography
with the flexibility of electron-beam lithography. In the
segmented-grid mode of SPLEBL, interference lithography
is first used to generate a coherent ‘‘fiducial’’ grating pattern
on the x-ray mask. Electron-beam lithography is then used to
JVST B - Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures

3209

write the quarter-wave-shifted patterns required by the device. During the e-beam writing, the existing interferometric
pattern on the mask is sampled in order to determine the
absolute beam position. This technique allows us to generate
quarter-wave-shifted gratings that span several e-beam writing fields, yet are free of the interfield stitching errors that
would otherwise be present.4
Because of the phase locking method used to write the
Bragg gratings, the period of the Bragg gratings is proportional to that of the interferometrically generated fiducial
gratings on the x-ray mask. Therefore, in order to control the
period of the Bragg gratings, it is necessary to control the
period of the fiducial gratings to the same relative tolerance,
typically to better than one part per thousand. For simplicity
of implementation, we have chosen the period of the e-beam
grating to be the same as that of the fiducial, although this is
not a fundamental requirement.
In interference lithography, the grating period depends
upon the wavelength of exposure and the angle between the
two beams that form the standing wave, according to
p⫽

␭
,
2 sin ␪

where ␭ is the wavelength and ␪ is the half-angle between
the two beams. Although the wavelength is quite accurately
controlled, the interference angle ␪ can only be adjusted to
an accuracy of a few milliradians, which is a factor of 5–10
worse than needed. To overcome this difficulty, we measure
the period of a test grating using the interferometercontrolled stage of our electron-beam lithography system,
and we then fine tune the interference lithography setup to
eliminate any period errors. After the test grating is recorded
by interference lithography onto a silicon wafer, the sample
is electroplated with gold to provide contrast for backscattered electron imaging in the e-beam system. The wafer is
mounted on the e-beam stage and the direction of the grating
lines with respect to the stage’s axes of translation is measured, to eliminate cosine errors. We measure the distance
across a large number of periods 共250–500兲 by translating
the stage. This distance divided by the number of periods
gives the grating period. Figure 2 is a histogram illustrating
the high precision achieved with this technique. This gold
grating on the Si wafer serves as a reference standard which
we use to set up the interference lithography, ensuring that
the fiducial grating that we next expose on the x-ray mask
has an accurately known period.
When printing gratings onto an x-ray mask using interference lithography, it is not possible to achieve sufficient angular alignment between the standing-wave pattern and a
reference direction on the mask. To solve this problem, after
the interference lithography is done, we use e-beam lithography to add alignment marks to the x-ray mask which are
referenced to the interferometric gratings. After recording the
interferometric grating on the x-ray mask, the grating is
cleared in selected areas. The mask is then placed in the
e-beam lithography tool and the rotation of the grating with
respect to the stage axes is measured by recording the 共x,y兲

3210

Lim et al.: Techniques for grating-based optical devices

FIG. 2. Histogram demonstrating the precision with which we can measure
the period of an interferometrically generated grating. The histogram was
obtained by repeatedly measuring the period of the same grating. The accuracy of the measurement is limited by the wavelength of the laser, which is
known to 1 part in 108 , and the cosine error due to misalignment of the
stage’s interferometer optics and its axes of motion, which we estimate to be
less than 1 part in 106 .

locations of several points along a single grating line, over a
distance of approximately 1 cm. Once this calibration has
been done, alignment marks—designed to overlay with those
from the waveguide photomask—are written in the cleared
areas. By means of this technique, we guarantee that the
alignment marks placed on the x-ray mask are aligned to the
corresponding marks on the waveguide mask to within an
angle of 10 ␮ rad. When the x-ray mask is aligned to the
waveguide level, the maximum overlay error 共measured after
exposure兲 is ⬃500 nm, corresponding to a maximum total
angular misalignment of under 50 ␮ rad.
IV. FABRICATION PROCESS
After the masks are generated, there remains the problem
of forming submicron grating patterns over relatively tall
surface topography. To address this problem, we have devel-

3210

oped a technique that we call the DLHP, which is outlined in
Fig. 3. In this process, the Bragg grating patterns are defined
first in a thin hard-mask layer on the substrate 关Fig. 3共a兲兴.
Before the gratings are etched, however, the waveguide features are patterned in a second hard mask on top of the grating hard mask 关Fig. 3共b兲兴. By patterning both hard masks
before the waveguide or grating features are etched into the
optical substrate, we ensure that all lithography steps are
performed over essentially planar surfaces.
The process begins with an optical substrate of InP with a
1.1-␮ m-thick layer of InGaAsP quaternary core. Onto the
substrate we deposit 50 nm of oxide via e-beam evaporation
to serve as the grating hard mask. Then we spin on a 300 nm
layer of PMMA and expose it in our x-ray lithography system using the Bragg-grating mask described earlier. We develop the PMMA in a mixture of MIBK:IPA:MEK 21:63:16.
After development, we transfer the grating patterns into the
oxide using reactive ion etching in a CHF3 plasma biased to
300 V. Having patterned the grating hard mask, the PMMA
is removed.
Because of the method used to generate the x-ray mask,
there are auxiliary patterns on the x-ray mask in addition to
the quarter-wave-shifted Bragg gratings, i.e., the fiducial
gratings. To prevent these patterns from being printed along
with the Bragg gratings, we use a second optical lithography
step to remove the extraneous features.
Next, we spin on a layer of AZ-5206 photoresist, and
expose the waveguide patterns using optical contact photolithography. In this step, we reference to the alignment marks
left by the grating mask to ensure angular alignment between
the waveguide and Bragg-grating axes. After development,
we lift off the waveguide pattern in 200 nm of Ni. Figure
4共a兲 is a scanning electron micrograph depicting the patterned Ni hard mask layer, with the underlying grating in
oxide. We then use the Ni waveguide layer as an etch mask

FIG. 3. Outline of the dual-layer-hardmask process
共DLHP兲, which allows us to pattern fine-period gratings
over relatively tall waveguide structures. By first patterning two hard-mask layers before forming the structure, we ensure that all lithography steps are performed
over essentially planar surfaces.

J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, Vol. 17, No. 6, Nov/Dec 1999

3211

Lim et al.: Techniques for grating-based optical devices

FIG. 4. 共a兲 Scanning electron micrograph showing both the grating hard
mask 共GHM兲 and the waveguide hard mask 共WHM兲 used in the process.
The waveguide features are patterned with optical photolithography and Ni
liftoff, and the underlying gratings are patterned in oxide via x-ray nanolithography and reactive-ion etching. 共b兲 After patterning both hard masks,
the excess grating patterns are removed using the waveguide pattern as a
mask.

to clear away any residual grating mask, as shown in Fig.
4共b兲.
The waveguide features are then etched into the InGaAsP
core material, using the Ni layer as hard mask. The InGaAsP
is reactive ion etched in a hydrocarbon plasma of
O2 /H2 /CH4 at flow rates of 2.5/19/19 sccm. We maintain a
DC bias of 300 V and chamber pressure of 4 mTorr. This
etch results in straight sidewalls and smooth etch surfaces, as
shown in Fig. 5共a兲. Next, the Ni is removed with a selective
wet chemical etch, revealing the underlying oxide grating
pattern. Then, the Bragg gratings are etched into the top
surface of the waveguide using the oxide hard mask. Finally,
the oxide layer is stripped using a solution of buffered HF,
completing the process. Figure 5共b兲 depicts the completed
structure after this etch sequence.
The final step in the process is to overgrow a top layer of
InP cladding material, thereby forming a buried-channel
waveguide structure. Low temperature overgrowth of squaretooth gratings without loss of profile has been demonstrated
with gas source molecular beam epitaxy 共GSMBE兲 by
Koontz et al.9
V. CONCLUSIONS
Bragg gratings are important components which offer the
potential for a wide range of filtering functions for optical

JVST B - Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures

3211

FIG. 5. Scanning electron micrographs showing 共a兲 the etched waveguides;
共b兲 final structure after etching of the gratings and removal of hard masks.
共The three parallel gratings shown here are portions of a higher-order filter.兲

telecommunications. The fabrication challenges presented by
Bragg grating devices are quite different from the challenges
traditionally confronted by the semiconductor industry. We
have developed a process for constructing integrated Bragg
gratings which specifically addresses these unique challenges, and demonstrated this process by constructing integrated quarter-wave-shifted Bragg grating devices in InP. Finally, we point out that the techniques described here can
easily be applied to other material systems, and other grating
geometries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to acknowledge Mark Mondol who operates the
MIT electron-beam-lithography facility, and Charles Joyner
共of Lucent Technologies兲 who generously provided us with
InGaAsP/InP materials for this work.
H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank, J. Appl. Phys. 43, 2327 共1972兲.
A. Othonos, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68, 4309 共1997兲.
3
H. A. Haus and Y. Lai, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 28, 205 共1992兲.
4
V. V. Wong, J. Ferrera, J. N. Damask, T. E. Murphy, and H. I. Smith, J.
Vac. Sci. Technol. B 13, 2859 共1995兲.
5
H. A. Haus and Y. Lai, J. Lightwave Technol. 10, 57 共1992兲.
6
J. Ferrera, J. N. Damask, V. V. Wong, H. I. Smith, and H. A. Haus,
Optical Fiber Communication Technical Digest 4, 139 共1994兲.
7
J. Ferrera, V. V. Wong, S. Rishton, V. Boegli, E. H. Anderson, D. P.
Kern, and H. I. Smith, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 11, 2342 共1993兲.
8
V. V. Wong, J. Ferrera, J. Damask, J. Carter, E. Moon, H. A. Haus, H. I.
Smith, and S. Rishton, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 12, 3741 共1994兲.
9
E. M. Koontz, M. H. Lim, V. V. Wong, G. S. Petrich, L. A. Kolodziejski,
H. I. Smith, K. M. Matney, G. D. U’Ren, and M. S. Goorsky, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 71, 1400 共1997兲.
1
2

