Towards a multi-input astrophotonic AWG spectrograph
Pradip Gatkinea , Sylvain Veilleuxa,b , Yiwen Huc , Joss Bland-Hawthornd , and Mario Dagenaisc
a

Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA
Joint Space-Science Institute, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA
c
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland 20742, USA
d
Sydney Institute for Astronomy and Sydney Astrophotonic Instrumentation Labs, School of
Physics, The University of Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia

arXiv:1905.13241v1 [astro-ph.IM] 30 May 2019

b

ABSTRACT
Astrophotonics is the new frontier technology to make suitable diffraction-limited spectrographs for the next
generation of large telescopes. Astrophotonic spectrographs are miniaturized, robust and cost-effective. For
various astronomical studies, such as probing the early universe, observing in near infrared (NIR) is crucial.
Therefore, our research group is developing moderate resolution (R ∼ 1500) on-chip photonic spectrographs in
the NIR bands (J Band: 1.1−1.4 µm; H band: 1.45−1.7 µm). To achieve this, we use the concept of arrayed
waveguide gratings (AWGs). We fabricate the device using a silica-on-silicon substrate. The waveguides on this
AWG are 2 µm wide and 0.1 µm high Si3 N4 core buried inside a 15 µm thick SiO2 cladding.
To make the maximal use of astrophotonic integration such as coupling the AWGs with multiple single-mode
fibers coming from photonic lanterns or fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs), we require a multi-input AWG design. In
a multi-input AWG, the output spectrum due to each individual input channel overlaps to produce a combined
spectrum from all inputs. This on-chip combination of light effectively improves the signal-to-noise ratio as
compared to spreading the photons to several AWGs with single inputs. In this paper, we present the design and
simulation results of an AWG in the H band with three input waveguides (channels). The resolving power of
individual input channels is ∼1500, while the overall resolving power with three inputs together is ∼500, 600, 750
in three different configurations simulated here. The device footprint is only 16 mm × 7 mm. The free spectral
range of the device is ∼9.5 nm around a central wavelength of 1600 nm. For the standard multi-input AWG, the
relative shift between the output spectra due to adjacent input channels is about 1.6 nm, which roughly equals
one spectral channel spacing. In this paper, we discuss ways to increase the resolving power and the number of
inputs without compromising the free spectral range or throughput.
Keywords: Astrophotonics, Arrayed Waveguide Gratings (AWGs), near-infrared (NIR), H band, spectrometer

1. INTRODUCTION
The field of photonics emerged as a revolution in telecommunication industry in the last two decades. This technology has since found widespread applications in fundamental and applied sciences. The photonic approach is
geared to solve to some of the major challenges in observational astronomy.1–3 As larger and larger ground- and
space-based telescopes are being proposed and built, the volume, mass, and cost of the associated conventional
optical instruments scale roughly as the cube of the diameter of the telescope.1 Maintaining the mechanical and
thermal stability over such large volumes and across different optical elements of an instrument is challenging.
For space telescopes, it is particularly crucial to keep the payload size and weight minimal. The astrophotonic
devices are miniaturized and hence, reduce the size and mass of astronomical instrumentation by several orders
of magnitude while keeping the costs substantially lower.2, 4, 5
Further author information: (Send correspondence to P. Gatkine)
E-mail: pgatkine@astro.umd.edu

The power of guiding the light and manipulating it on a micro/nano scale in photonics has imparted immense
flexibility to a wide variety of astronomical instruments.2, 3 These instruments include spectrographs,6–9 spatial/spectral filters10 , Bragg gratings,11, 12 precision wavelength calibrators,13 interferometers,14 nullers,15 beam
combiners etc. Along with these instruments, the technology of coupling the inherently multi-mode astronomical light into these primarily single-mode photonic devices has taken a quantum leap. Some of the prominent
light-carrying and -coupling devices/technologies include: photonic lanterns,16, 17 pupil remappers,15 fiber hexabundles18 and multi-core fibers.19 This development is further augmented by the improvements in the adaptive
optics (eg. SCExAO20 ), especially in the near-infrared, enabling a reduction in the number of modes required to
efficiently collect the starlight into a multi-/few-mode fiber.21 All of these recent developments described above
are ushering the field of astronomical instrumentation to the photonic era.

1.1 Scientific Motivation
The photonic spectrograph described here is designed for a specific scientific exploration. Studying the galaxy
evolution and the composition of galaxies in the first few billion years of the universe is a unsolved question, which
demands deep observations using large area telescopes and efficiently dispersing the collected light to study the
signatures of various atomic and ionic species that reveal the composition, physical conditions and kinematics
of the material in, around, and between galaxies.22–25 Most of these signatures are in the rest-frame ultraviolet
(UV) wavelengths. Due to accelerating expansion of the universe, this UV light from the first few billion years
of the universe gets redshifted to near-infrared (NIR) light in the observed frame. It is therefore important
to focus the investigation of early universe in J and H bands (1150-1350 nm and 1450-1650 nm respectively).
The resolving power needs to be high enough to enable meaningful scientific investigation but at the same time
it is necessary to maintain a high signal-to-noise ratio, especially since these distant objects tend to be faint.
Therefore a moderate resolution (λ/δλ ∼1500) is required. This kind of exploration requires large telescopes
(>8 m aperture) and the volume of associated conventional spectrographs scales with the telescope aperture in a
superlinear fashion.1, 2 These large-scale instruments face major challenges in mechanical and thermal stability
of the optical components. Therefore, implementation of a compact integrated photonic spectrograph is of
particular interest in this case.

Figure 1. Analogy between conventional grating spectrograph (left) and arrayed waveguide gratings (right), from Gatkine
et al. 2016

1.2 Arrayed Waveguide Grating Spectrograph (AWG)
Among various photonic solutions, arrayed waveguide gratings is a particularly promising approach owing to a
well-developed design methodology from telecommunication industry and relative ease of fabrication. An arrayed
waveguide grating is, in principle, similar to a conventional diffraction grating spectrograph, as shown in Fig 1.9
The input light is guided through the input waveguides to the free propagation region (FPR), which illuminates

the array of waveguides with the same phase. The array is constructed such that the path difference between
adjacent waveguides is a fixed multiple (i.e. the spectral order) of the wavelength. This light interferes in the
output free propagation region leading to constructive interference peaks at the output FPR interface depending
on the wavelength. Multiple spectral orders overlap at the output FPR interface depending on the designed free
spectral range of the device. The output FPR can either be sampled by output waveguides (as shown in Fig. 1)
to measure the spectral composition of the light in specific discrete channels, or the output FPR can be exposed
and the overlapping orders can be separated by a low resolution cross disperser (as shown in Fig. 2). This
approach gives a more continuous picture of the spectral information, as required in most of the astronomical
explorations.

2. AN INTEGRATED PHOTONIC SPECTROGRAPH
The AWG spectrograph described here is the principal component of the integrated astrophotonic spectrograph
in the near-IR for the scientific exploration described above using ground-based telescopes. Ground-based nearIR spectroscopy, especially at moderate resolutions is challenging since the near-IR sky gives a bright background
from the narrow atmospheric OH-emission lines.11, 26, 27 For a moderate resolution spectrograph, it is important
to selectively eliminate these OH-lines prior to dispersion to minimize the noise. We have developed waveguide
Bragg gratings (WBGs) to introduce notch filters in the light path to selectively eliminate the OH-emission lines
prior to dispersion step in the AWGs.11, 12 These on-chip devices operate in single-mode waveguides, while the
telescope illumination is multimode in nature due to atmospheric turbulence. A photonic lantern will be used
to efficiently capture and guide the light into several single mode fibers/waveguides.17, 28 The multimode light
from the telescope is efficiently coupled into multimode fibers. The photonic lanterns adiabatically taper the
multimode fiber into several single-mode fibers (the number depends on quality of the telescope beam). These
single-mode fibers will feed the integrated chip with WBGs and AWG on it. Various spectral orders of the
dispersed AWG light are separated in the orthogonal direction using a compact low-resolution cross dispersion
setup and thus the 2D spectrum will be imaged onto the detector. The schematic of this integrated spectrograph
is shown in Fig. 2. This design provides the modularity to stack several of these integrated photonic chips fed
by separate lanterns for multi-object spectroscopy or taking spectra of the different wavebands simultaneously
using dedicated photonic chips for that particular waveband.

Figure 2. A schematic of the full setup of an integrated photonic spectrograph with OH-suppression

2.1 A Few-input AWG
In Gatkine et al. 2017, we demonstrated a single-input, moderate resolution (R∼1000), high-throughput (peak
overall throughput ∼ 25%), broad-band AWG designed for H-band (1450−1550 nm). However, capturing the

Figure 3. The CAD of the designed multi-input AWG. The input waveguides are on the left and the output is sampled
by 5 waveguides. There are 34 waveguides in the array. The footprint of the chip is 16 mm × 7 mm
Table 1. Summary of the AWG design

Parameters
1. Spectral resolution for each input (λ/δλ)
2. Free spectral range for each input

Design value
∼1500
∼9.5 nm

1. Waveguide cross-section

2.0 × 0.1 µm

2. Number of waveguides

34

3. FPR length

200 µm

4. ∆L

172 µm

5. Separation between waveguides at array-FPR interface

6 µm

6. Output waveguide spacing

6 µm

7. Footprint

16 mm × 7 mm

telescope light in a single mode fiber is not highly efficient since the beam is not diffraction limited (unlike the
case for radio telescopes) due to atmospheric turbulence.29 Thanks to the recent developments in adaptive optics
(eg. SCExAO), it is possible to achieve near-diffraction limited performance, thus allowing efficient coupling of
light into a few-mode fiber in near-IR.30 In this paper, we are exploring the case of a three-input spectrograph as
a test-bench to understand the challenges of a multi-input AWG from an astronomical perspective and propose
solutions to effectively combine the light from multiple inputs to achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio spectrum.

2.2 Design
The AWG design is similar to the AWG in Gatkine et al. 2017, but with three input waveguides (instead of one)
at the same spatial separation as designed for the output waveguides. This spatial separation is chosen since it
is the standard in wavelength division multiplexing application in telecommunication industry where the AWG
approach originated.31 The detailed design, throughput and wavelegnth response of the single-input AWG are
described in Gatkine et al. 2017. The physical parameters of the current multi-input AWG are described in
Table 1. The design free spectral range of the AWG is 9.5 nm, thus covering the entire H-band in roughly 23
spectral orders. The size of the AWG chip is 16 mm × 7 mm.

Figure 4. Simulation results: Each plot shows the normalized throughput of the central output channel in red, green and
blue when input 1, 2, and 3 are illuminated respectively. The three cases show the effect of bringing the input waveguides
progressively closer by changing the waveguide separation from 3 times the waveguide width (i.e.6 µm) to 2 times (4 µm)
and further to 1.5 times (3 µm).

2.3 Simulation
The AWG was simulated using Rsoft software32 to study the characteristics of a representative spectral order
centered around 1600 nm. There are 3 input waveguides for this AWG and the output FPR is sampled by 5
output waveguides. In the spectral domain, each of the ‘discrete’ output waveguides are separated by ∆λ ∼
1.6 nm (by design) in all the spectral orders. This is also called ‘channel spacing. The AWG is simulated by
illuminating each input waveguide one by one and calculating the response at each of the output waveguides.
Here, we will focus on the central output channel of the AWG (as shown in Fig.3) and explore how the wavelength
response changes with various modifications in the input waveguides. For simplicity, we vary the input waveguide
separation progressively as shown in Fig. 4.

2.4 Results
Each off-center input gives an output spectrum that is shifted in wavelength by an amount (say, dλ) proportional
to the offset from the central input waveguide. This dλ shift leads to degradation of the resolving power roughly
by a factor of number of input waveguides × dλ/∆λ, where ∆λ is the channel spacing as described in the
above paragraph (in this case, ∼1.6 nm). The goal is to keep this shift minimal to reduce the degradation from
the design resolving power. This way, the desired resolution can be achieved without increasing the intrinsic
resolution of the AWG by a large factor (to compensate for the degradation).
Towards that objective, we employ the idea of minimizing the separation between the input waveguides to
the maximum possible extent. We demonstrate this idea from the simulation described in Fig. 4. The waveguide
separation and the effect on the resolving power degradation is summarized in Fig. 4 and Table 2. It is clear
from these simulations that feeding the input light to the AWGs using a compact assembly of waveguides is a

very effective approach for minimizing the central wavelength shift and thereby obtaining the desired resolution
with minimal need of compensation.
We are currently developing a photonic spectrograph with a compact input feed to incorporate a few single
mode fibers emanating from the photonic lantern attached to an AO-corrected telescope’s focus. This demonstration will work as a stepping stone for fabrication and physically implementation of a higher resolution AWG
(by increasing the spectral order) whose final resolution (including the resolution degradation) will be ∼1500.
Table 2. Summary of the AWG simulations

AWG case

Resolving power degradation factor

1. Input waveguide separation: 6µm, taper width: 4µm

1/3

2. Input waveguide separation: 4µm, taper width: 4µm

1/2.5

3. Input waveguide separation: 3µm, taper width: 3µm

1/2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the University of Maryland NanoCenter for the fabrication expertise and the astrophotonics
group at University of Sydney and Maquarie University for providing a comprehensive overview of new developments in photonics. The authors thank Prof. Stuart Vogel for his suggestions. The authors acknowledge the
financial support for this project from the W. M. Keck Foundation, National Science Foundation, and NASA.

REFERENCES
[1] Bland-Hawthorn, J. and Kern, P., “Astrophotonics: a new era for astronomical instruments,” Optics Express 17(3), 1880–1884 (2009).
[2] Bland-Hawthorn, J. and Leon-Saval, S. G., “Astrophotonics: molding the flow of light in astronomical
instruments,” Optics express 25(13), 15549–15557 (2017).
[3] Ellis, S., Kuhlmann, S., Kuehn, K., Spinka, H., Underwood, D., Gupta, R., Ocola, L., Liu, P., Wei, G.,
Stern, N., et al., “Astrophotonics: the application of photonic technology to astronomy,” in [Integrated
Optics: Physics and Simulations III], 10242, 102420O, International Society for Optics and Photonics
(2017).
[4] Blind, N., Coarer, E. L., Kern, P., and Gousset, S., “Spectrographs for astrophotonics,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.01669 (2017).
[5] Bland-Hawthorn, J. and Horton, A., “Instruments without optics: an integrated photonic spectrograph,”
in [Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy ], 6269, 62690N, International Society for
Optics and Photonics (2006).
[6] Cvetojevic, N., Jovanovic, N., Betters, C., Lawrence, J., Ellis, S., Robertson, G., and Bland-Hawthorn,
J., “First starlight spectrum captured using an integrated photonic micro-spectrograph,” Astronomy &
Astrophysics 544, L1 (2012).
[7] Cvetojevic, N., Jovanovic, N., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Haynes, R., and Lawrence, J., “Miniature spectrographs: characterization of arrayed waveguide gratings for astronomy,” in [SPIE Astronomical Telescopes+
Instrumentation], 77394H–77394H, International Society for Optics and Photonics (2010).
[8] Gatkine, P., Veilleux, S., Hu, Y., Bland-Hawthorn, J., and Dagenais, M., “Arrayed waveguide grating
spectrometers for astronomical applications: new results,” Optics Express 25(15), 17918–17935 (2017).
[9] Gatkine, P., Veilleux, S., Hu, Y., Zhu, T., Meng, Y., Bland-Hawthorn, J., and Dagenais, M., “Development
of high-resolution arrayed waveguide grating spectrometers for astronomical applications: first results,” in
[Advances in Optical and Mechanical Technologies for Telescopes and Instrumentation II ], 9912, 991271,
International Society for Optics and Photonics (2016).

[10] Huss, G., Leproux, P., Reynaud, F., and Doya, V., “Spatial filtering efficiency of single-mode optical fibers for
stellar interferometry applications: phenomenological and numerical study,” Optics communications 244(16), 209–217 (2005).
[11] Zhu, T., Hu, Y., Gatkine, P., Veilleux, S., Bland-Hawthorn, J., and Dagenais, M., “Arbitrary on-chip optical
filter using complex waveguide bragg gratings,” Applied Physics Letters 108(10), 101104 (2016).
[12] Hu, Y.-W., Zhang, Y., Gatkine, P., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Veilleux, S., and Dagenais, M., “An efficient
approach to characterize low loss waveguides using bragg gratings,” in [CLEO: Science and Innovations],
JW2A–65, Optical Society of America (2018).
[13] Murphy, M. T., Udem, T., Holzwarth, R., Sizmann, A., Pasquini, L., Araujo-Hauck, C., Dekker, H.,
D’Odorico, S., Fischer, M., Hänsch, T., et al., “High-precision wavelength calibration of astronomical spectrographs with laser frequency combs,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 380(2), 839–847
(2007).
[14] Labadie, L., Berger, J.-P., Cvetojevic, N., Haynes, R., Harris, R., Jovanovic, N., Lacour, S., Martin, G.,
Minardi, S., Perrin, G., et al., “Astronomical photonics in the context of infrared interferometry and highresolution spectroscopy,” in [Optical and Infrared Interferometry and Imaging V], 9907, 990718, International Society for Optics and Photonics (2016).
[15] Jovanovic, N., Tuthill, P. G., Norris, B., Gross, S., Stewart, P., Charles, N., Lacour, S., Ams, M., Lawrence,
J., Lehmann, A., et al., “Starlight demonstration of the dragonfly instrument: an integrated photonic
pupil-remapping interferometer for high-contrast imaging,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 427(1), 806–815 (2012).
[16] Birks, T. A., Gris-Sánchez, I., Yerolatsitis, S., Leon-Saval, S., and Thomson, R. R., “The photonic lantern,”
Advances in Optics and Photonics 7(2), 107–167 (2015).
[17] Leon-Saval, S. G., Argyros, A., and Bland-Hawthorn, J., “Photonic lanterns: a study of light propagation
in multimode to single-mode converters,” Optics Express 18(8), 8430–8439 (2010).
[18] Bland-Hawthorn, J., Bryant, J., Robertson, G., Gillingham, P., OByrne, J., Cecil, G., Haynes, R., Croom,
S., Ellis, S., Maack, M., et al., “Hexabundles: imaging fiber arrays for low-light astronomical applications,”
Optics Express 19(3), 2649–2661 (2011).
[19] Lindley, E., Min, S.-S., Leon-Saval, S., Cvetojevic, N., Lawrence, J., Ellis, S., and Bland-Hawthorn, J.,
“Demonstration of uniform multicore fiber bragg gratings,” Optics express 22(25), 31575–31581 (2014).
[20] Martinache, F., Guyon, O., Lozi, J., Garrel, V., Blain, C., and Sivo, G., “The subaru coronagraphic extreme
ao project,” in [AIP Conference Proceedings], 1158(1), 319–322, AIP (2009).
[21] Horton, A. J. and Bland-Hawthorn, J., “Coupling light into few-mode optical fibres i: The diffraction limit,”
Optics Express 15(4), 1443–1453 (2007).
[22] Gnedin, N. Y. and Ostriker, J. P., “Reionization of the universe and the early production of metals,” The
Astrophysical Journal 486(2), 581 (1997).
[23] Robertson, B. E., Ellis, R. S., Dunlop, J. S., McLure, R. J., and Stark, D. P., “Early star-forming galaxies
and the reionization of the universe,” Nature 468(7320), 49 (2010).
[24] Tanvir, N., Levan, A., Fruchter, A., Fynbo, J. P. U., Hjorth, J., Wiersema, K., Bremer, M., Rhoads, J.,
Jakobsson, P., O’Brien, P., et al., “Star formation in the early universe: beyond the tip of the iceberg,” The
Astrophysical Journal 754(1), 46 (2012).
[25] Gatkine, P., Veilleux, S., Cucchiara, A., and Cenko, B., “Cgm-grb: A survey of the circumgalactic medium
around grb hosts,” in [American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts ], 231 (2018).
[26] Ellis, S. and Bland-Hawthorn, J., “The case for oh suppression at near-infrared wavelengths,” Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 386(1), 47–64 (2008).
[27] Trinh, C. Q., Ellis, S. C., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Lawrence, J. S., Horton, A. J., Leon-Saval, S. G., Shortridge,
K., Bryant, J., Case, S., Colless, M., et al., “Gnosis: the first instrument to use fiber bragg gratings for oh
suppression,” The Astronomical Journal 145(2), 51 (2013).
[28] Spaleniak, I., Gross, S., Jovanovic, N., Williams, R. J., Lawrence, J. S., Ireland, M. J., and Withford, M. J.,
“Multiband processing of multimode light: combining 3d photonic lanterns with waveguide bragg gratings,”
Laser & Photonics Reviews 8(1) (2014).

[29] Shaklan, S. and Roddier, F., “Coupling starlight into single-mode fiber optics,” Applied Optics 27(11),
2334–2338 (1988).
[30] Jovanovic, N., Cvetojevic, N., Schwab, C., Norris, B., Lozi, J., Gross, S., Betters, C., Singh, G., Guyon, O.,
Martinache, F., et al., “Efficiently feeding single-mode fiber photonic spectrographs with an extreme adaptive optics system: on-sky characterization and preliminary spectroscopy,” in [Ground-based and Airborne
Instrumentation for Astronomy VI], 9908, 99080R, International Society for Optics and Photonics (2016).
[31] Smit, M. K. and Van Dam, C., “Phasar-based wdm-devices: Principles, design and applications,” IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 2 (2) (1996).
[32] BeamPROP. https://https://optics.synopsys.com. AWG Utility from Synposys.

