PHASAR-based WDM-devices: principles, design and
applications
Citation for published version (APA):
Smit, M. K., & Dam, van, C. (1996). PHASAR-based WDM-devices: principles, design and applications. IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 2(2), 236-250.

Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/1996
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.

Download date: 18. Jun. 2026

236

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

PHASAR-Based WDM-Devices:
Principles, Design and Applications
Meint K. Smit, Associate Member, IEEE, and Cor van Dam
(Invited Paper)

Abstract—Wavelength multiplexers, demultiplexers and routers
based on optical phased arrays play a key role in multiwavelength
telecommunication links and networks. In this paper, a detailed
description of phased-array operation and design is presented
and an overview is given of the most important applications.

I. INTRODUCTION

C

OMMERCIAL interest in WDM components and systems is rapidly increasing. WDM provides a new dimension for solving capacity and flexibility problems in the
telecommunication network. It offers a huge transmission
capacity and allows for novel network architectures that offer
much more flexibility than the current networks [16], [17]. Key
components in WDM systems are the wavelength multiplexers
and demultiplexers. Many principles have been proposed and
reported for realization of multiplexers and demultiplexers.
Commercially available components are based on fiber-optic
or microoptic techniques [56], [57]. Research on integratedoptic (de)multiplexers has, since the early 1990’s, increasingly
been focused on grating-based and phased-array (PHASAR)
based devices (also called arrayed waveguide gratings) [97].
Both are imaging devices, i.e., they image the field of an
input waveguide onto an array of output waveguides in a
dispersive way. In grating-based devices a vertically etched
reflection grating provides the focusing and dispersive properties required for demultiplexing. In phased-array based devices
these properties are provided by an array of waveguides, the
length of which has been chosen such as to obtain the required
imaging and dispersive properties. As phased-array based
devices are realized in conventional waveguide technology and
do not require the vertical etching step needed in grating-based
devices they appear to be more robust and fabrication tolerant.
Phased array demultiplexers were proposed in 1988 by Smit
[58]. The first devices operating at short wavelengths were
reported by Vellekoop and Smit [93]–[95], [59]. Takahashi et
al. reported the first devices operating in the long wavelength
window [87], [88]. Dragone extended the phased-array concept
from
to
devices, the so-called wavelength routers
[27], [28] which play an important role in multiwavelength
network applications.
Manuscript received July 23, 1996; revised November 7, 1996. Part of this
work was carried out in the ACTS-BLISS AC-065 project.
The authors are with the Delft University of Technology, NL-2600 GA
Delft, The Netherlands.
Publisher Item Identifier S 1077-260X(96)09506-8.

Devices reported so far can be divided into two main
classes: silica-based devices and InP-based devices. Most of
the silica-based devices employ fiber-matched (low-contrast)
waveguide structures, which combine low propagation loss
with a high fiber-coupling efficiency. More recently siliconbased polymer devices [32], [69] and lithiumniobate devices
[53], [54] were reported which also employed fiber-matched
waveguide structures.
Silica-based devices have relatively large dimensions due
to the low index contrast and the corresponding large bending
radii of the fiber-matched waveguides. This makes them
less suitable for integration of large numbers of components
on a single chip. Further, silica has a limited potential for
integration of active functions due to its passive character.
The feasibility of integration with switches, however, was
demonstrated by Okamoto who reported successful integration
of thermo-optical switches with phased-arrays in an integrated
optical add-drop multiplexer [48], [49], [52].
The first InP-based PHASAR-demultiplexer was reported
in 1992 by Zirngibl et al. [106]. InP-based devices have a
better potential for integration of active functions. They exhibit
higher propagation and fiber-coupling losses, however, the
latter due to the small size of the waveguide cross section.
Despite of the higher propagation losses the total on-chip
device loss can be kept within acceptable limits due to the
small component size which is possible because of the highindex contrast and which also allows for integrating larger
numbers of components on a chip. InP-based demultiplexers
cannot compete with silica-based devices with respect to fiber
coupling loss, which makes them less suitable for realization
of circuits with a low complexity. Their main advantage lies
in their potential for monolithic integration of active components such as detectors [3], [4], [6], [74]–[76], [113], optical
amplifiers and modulators [39]–[41], [108]–[112], [115], and
switches [99], and their potential to integrate large numbers of
components on a single chip.
Starting in 1993 [80], an increasing number of system experiments have been reported. The first silicon-based devices were
recently introduced to the market. Integrated devices are still in
a research stage but promise to provide the higher functionality
which will be required in future telecommunication networks.
In this paper, we will review the present state-of-the-art for
phased-array based devices. In Section II, the operation of
the device will be described. Section III describes phasedarray design for a number of different requirements, such

1077–260X/96$5.00  1996 IEEE

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

237

as polarization independence, flattened wavelength response,
low-loss, etc. Section IV describes a number of applications of
phased-array demultiplexers. In Section V, a novel PHASARdemultiplexer based on MMI-couplers is shortly described.
II. BASIC OPERATION
Fig. 1(a) shows the schematic layout of a PHASARdemultiplexer. The operation is understood as follows. When
the beam propagating through the transmitter waveguide
enters the free propagation region (FPR) it is no longer
laterally confined and becomes divergent. On arriving at the
input aperture the beam is coupled into the waveguide array
and propagates through the individual array waveguides to
the output aperture. The length of the array waveguides is
chosen such that the optical path length difference between
adjacent waveguides equals an integer multiple of the central
wavelength of the demultiplexer. For this wavelength the
fields in the individual waveguides will arrive at the output
aperture with equal phase (apart from an integer multiple of
2 ), and the field distribution at the input aperture will be
reproduced at the output aperture. The divergent beam at the
input aperture is thus transformed into a convergent one with
equal amplitude and phase distribution, and an image of the
input field at the object plane will be formed at the center of
the image plane. The dispersion of the PHASAR is due to the
linearly increasing length of the array waveguides, which will
cause the phase change induced by a change in the wavelength
to vary linearly along the output aperture. As a consequence,
the outgoing beam will be tilted and the focal point will shift
along the image plane. By placing receiver waveguides at
proper positions along the image plane, spatial separation of
the different wavelength channels is obtained.
In the following subsections, the most important properties
of a PHASAR will be analyzed.
A. Focusing
Focusing is obtained by choosing the length difference
between adjacent array waveguides equal to an integer number
of wavelengths, measured inside the array waveguides
(1)
in which
is the order of the phased array,
is
the central wavelength (frequency) in vacuo, and
is the
effective index of the waveguide mode. With this choice the
array acts as a lens with image and object planes at a distance
of the array apertures.
The input and output apertures of the phased array are
typical examples of Rowland-type mountings [43]. The focal
line of such a mounting, which defines the image plane,
follows a circle with radius
as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Transmitter and receiver waveguides should be positioned on
this line.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 1. (a) Layout of the PHASAR demultiplexer. (b) Geometry of the
receiver side.

follows as
asin

(2)

and
are the propagation
in which
constants of the waveguide mode and the slab mode in the
free propagation region (FPR), respectively, and
is the
lateral spacing (on center lines) of the waveguides in the array
aperture.
The dispersion
of the array is described as the lateral
displacement
of the focal spot along the image plane per
unit frequency change. From Fig. 1(b), it follows (after some
manipulation) that
(3)
is the central frequency,
is the
in which
(slab) mode index in the free propagation region,
is the
length increment of the array waveguides as described before,
is the divergence angle between the array
waveguides in the fan-in and fan-out sections, and
is the
group index of the waveguide mode,
(4)

B. Dispersion and Free Spectral Range
From Fig. 1(b), it is seen that the dispersion angle resulting from a phase difference
between adjacent waveguides

It is seen that
does not occur in the right-hand expression in
(3) so that filling-in of the space between the array waveguides

238

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

in which

is the width of the equivalent Gaussian far field
(8)

Fig. 2. Central insertion loss, nonuniformity and FSR. The 100% line
denotes the peak intensity of the input field.

the effective width of the modal field (as described
with
is defined as the
in Appendix A). The nonuniformity
intensity ratio (in decibels) between the outer and the central
channel. Using (7), the insertion loss of the receiver relative
to the central channel is easily found by substituting the angle
corresponding to the outer receiver
waveguide
(9)

near the apertures due to a finite lithographical resolution does
not affect the dispersive properties of the demultiplexer.
From (2), it is seen that the response of the phased array
is periodical. After each change of 2 in
the field will
be imaged at the same position. The period in the frequency
domain, as shown in Fig. 2(b), is called the free spectral range
(FSR). It is found as the frequency shift for which the phase
shift
equals 2
(5)
from which we find
(6)
.
with
The rightmost identity, which is well known from grating
theory, follows by substituting
[see (1)]. It is
noted that for phased arrays, different from gratings, the FSR
is not related to the order
of the array, but to a modified
order number
, which can be interpreted as the order of
the beam.
As the exact relation between and
is nonlinear [see
(2)], (6) is only approximate and the FSR will be slightly
dependent on the input and output ports. An accurate analysis
is given by Takahashi et al. [91].
C. Insertion Loss and Nonuniformity
Fig. 2(a) shows the field in the image plane for four different
wavelengths. It is the sum-field of the far fields of all individual
array waveguides. As the far-field intensity of the individual
waveguides reduces away from the center of the image plane,
as indicated in the figure, the focal sum-field will do the same.
If the wavelength is changed it will move through the image
plane and follow the envelope described by the far-field of
the individual array waveguides. If we approximate the modal
field of the array waveguides as a Gaussian beam, and neglect
the effects of coupling on the beam shape, we can derive
some simple analytical equations for estimating insertion loss,
channel nonuniformity and bandwidth.
Using the Gaussian-beam approximation the intensity of the
far-field is found from
(7)

,
If the FSR is chosen equal to times the channel spacing
as in wavelength routers (see Section IV-A), the excess loss
of the outer channels will be close to 3 dB for reasons of
power conservation: as for large numbers of channels receiver
waveguide 1 and the virtual receiver
1 will experience
approximately the same loss, each of them has at least 3-dB
excess loss relative to the central channel. For small values of
the situation may be slightly better. Minimizing
thus
comes to increasing the FSR.
of the central channel is mainly
The insertion loss
determined by diffraction of light into undesired orders. The
adjacent orders of the main focal spot will carry a fraction
, with
(10)
in which
is the dispersion (3). If we neglect the power
coupled into other orders the total loss
can be estimated
from

(11)
.
in which it has been assumed that
The factor 4 is due to the fact that power is lost in two orders,
and equal losses occur (because of reciprocity) at both the
input and the output side of the array. The term
denotes
the total propagation loss in the array and both FPR’s due to
absorption and scattering. From this equation it is seen that
for low-loss devices the waveguide spacing
in the array
apertures should be minimal. For semiconductor-based devices
best total loss reported is in the order of 2 dB [77]. It should
be noted that (11) is a worst-case guess: coupling between the
array waveguides will reduce the loss as discussed in Section
III-E.

D. Bandwidth
If the wavelength is changed the focal field of the PHASAR
moves along the receiver waveguides. The frequency response
of the different channels follows from the overlap of this
field with the modal fields of the receiver waveguides. If we

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

assume that the focal field is a good replica of the modal
field at the input, and that the input and output waveguides
are identical, the (logarithmic) transmission
around the
channel maximum
follows as the overlap of the modal
field with itself, displaced over a distance
(12)
is the normalized modal field,
is the
in which
dispersion as defined in (3) and
is the transmission in
dB at the channel maximum. For small values of
(smaller
than the effective mode width ) the overlap integral can be
evaluated analytically by approximating the modal fields as
Gaussian fields

The

-dB bandwidth

is twice the value

(13)
for which

dB
(14)
The latter identity follows by substitution of
. If
we substitute
as a representative value (crosstalk
due to receiver spacing
40 dB, see Section II-E), the 1-dB
bandwidth is found to be 0.31
. For a channel spacing
of 100 GHz we thus find a 1-dB bandwidth of 31 GHz.
E. Channel Crosstalk
Crosstalk may be caused by many mechanisms. We will
discuss six of them. The first four can be kept low by
proper design. The other two follow from imperfections in
the fabrication process and are more difficult to reduce.
It is usual in the literature on WDM devices to characterize
the crosstalk performance by specifying the single channel
crosstalk figure, i.e., the maximum crosstalk value which is
measured with one active input channel. Under operating
conditions the crosstalk will be higher than this value because
all active input channels will contribute to it. An analysis of the
crosstalk penalty under simultaneous multichannel operation is
given by Takahashi et al. [91].
1) Receiver Crosstalk: The most obvious source of
crosstalk is the coupling between the receivers through
the exponential tails of the field distributions. This type
of crosstalk directly follows from (12). Because we are
now looking at the coupling through the exponential
tails of the modal field the Gaussian approximation is
not valid and the integral should be evaluated using
the expressions for the (normalized) mode profile.
In Fig. 3(a) the crosstalk due to overlapping fields
has been calculated for different lateral -parameters.
The curves are almost polarization independent. Note
that in polarization dependent waveguides the lateral
-parameter will be polarization dependent.
2) Truncation: Another source of crosstalk results from
truncation of the field due to the finite width of the
array aperture. This causes power to be lost at the input

239

aperture, and at the output aperture the sidelobe level
of the focal field will increase. For a proper PHASAR
design, the array aperture angle should be chosen such
that the corresponding crosstalk is sufficiently low.
Fig. 3(b) shows the transmitted power (solid line) and
the crosstalk versus the array aperture half angle ,
normalized to the Gaussian width
as defined in
(8), for different values of the relative receiver spacing
. The values shown are calculated for input and
output waveguides with
. As the estimation
of Fig. 3(a) is rather pessimistic, it is best to use the
envelope depicted by the bold line. The dependence on
the -parameter is small. The envelope of the crosstalk
curves (bold line) can be used for extimating the
maximum crosstalk level. It is seen that for
the truncation crosstalk is less than 35 dB.
3) Mode Conversion: If the array waveguides are not
strictly single mode a first-order mode excited at the
junctions between straight and curved waveguides
can propagate coherently through the array and
cause “ghost” images. Because of the difference
in propagation constant between the fundamental
and the first-order mode these images will occur at
different locations and the “ghost image” may couple
to an undesired receiver thus degrading the crosstalk
performance. Mode conversion can be kept small
by optimising the offset at the junctions on minimal
first-order mode excitation.
4) Coupling in the Array: Crosstalk can also be incurred
by phase distortion due to coupling in the input and
output sections in the arrays. It might be expected that
this type of coupling will not heavily affect the focusing
and dispersive properties of the array on similar grounds
as mentioned under (3) and (4). The filling in of the
gaps near the array apertures can be considered as
introducing an extremely strong coupling in the input
and output region, which obviously does not degrade
the PHASAR performance [59]. Day et al. [24] observe
a degradation of the crosstalk performance using BPMsimulation, however.
5) Phase Transfer Incoherence: A fifth source of crosstalk
results from incoherence of the phased array due to
imperfections in the fabrication process. The optical
path length of the array guides is in the order of
several thousands of wavelengths. Deviations in the
propagation constant may lead to considerable errors in
the phase transfer, and, consequently, to an increase of
the crosstalk level. Takada et al. [86] and Yamada et al.
[101], [102] have shown that improved crosstalk is feasible by correcting the phase errors. Phase errors may
be caused by small deviations in the effective index,
due to local variations in composition, film thickness or
waveguide width, or by inhomogeneous filling in of the
gap near the apertures of the phased array. Also more
systematic errors, e.g., due to discretization in the mask
pattern generation may contribute to the crosstalk [24].
6) Background Radiation: As a last possible source of
crosstalk, we mention background radiation due to

240

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

light scattered out of the waveguides at junctions or
rough waveguide edges. This is especially important
in waveguide structures where the light is also guided
besides the waveguides, e.g., in shallowly etched ridge
guides or in waveguides structures on a heavily doped
substrate where the undoped buffer layer may also act
as a waveguide.
Crosstalk in practical devices is not limited by design but
by imperfections in the fabrication process. Typical crosstalk
values reported for PHASAR-demultiplexers are in the order
of 25 dB for InP-based devices to better than 30 dB for
silica-based devices. Recent experiments in our laboratory
show crosstalk levels better than 30 dB also for good
semiconductor devices. Improvement of these figures is mainly
a matter of improving fabrication technology.

(a)

F. Polarization Dependence
Phased arrays are polarization independent if the array
waveguides are polarization independent, i.e., the propagation
constants for the fundamental TE- and TM-mode are equal.
Waveguide birefringence, i.e., a difference in propagation
constants, will result in a shift
of the spectral responses
with respect to each other, which is called the polarization
dispersion. It can be calculated if we consider the wavelengths
in the waveguide. Light with different wavelengths in vacuo
will be coupled into the same receiver waveguide, if the
wavelengths
and
of the fundamental modes in the
waveguide are equal

(15)
in which
and
are the effective indices for both
polarizations. By solving
from (15), we find
(16)
is the group index. For InGaAsP–InP DH
in which
is typically in the order of 4–5
waveguide structures
nm. For silica-based and, more generally, for low-contrast
waveguides, it will be much smaller. Also in waveguides
structures which are designed for polarization independence
polarization dependence may occur due to strain induced
during the fabrication process. A number of methods to reduce
polarization dependence will be discussed in Section IV.
III. PHASED-ARRAY DESIGN
A. Specification
A PHASAR is specified by the following characteristics:
• number of channels ;
• central frequency
and channel spacing
;
• -dB channel bandwidth
;
• free spectral range
;
• maximal insertion loss
of the central channel;
• maximal nonuniformity
;

(b)
Fig. 3. (a) Crosstalk resulting from the coupling between two adjacent
receiver channels for different values of the lateral V -parameter of the receiver
waveguides. (b) Transmitted power (solid line) and crosstalk as a function of
the relative array aperture a =0 , for different values of the relative receiver
2.5, 3.0, 3.5). The values shown are calculated for
spacing dr =w (dr =w
input and output waveguides with V
3. The bold line indicates the envelope
of the crosstalk curves (maximum crosstalk level).

=

=

• maximal crosstalk level;
• maximal polarization dependence.
It is noted that the nonuniformity and the FSR can not be
chosen independent from each other (see Section IV-A).
B. Demultiplexer Design Procedure
PHASAR’s have many degrees of design freedom, and
many design approaches are possible. The approach followed
at Delft University of Technology for designing multiplexers
and demultiplexers is explained below. It starts from a given
waveguide structure (i.e., waveguide width
and lateral parameter fixed). The design parameters of the PHASAR
are derived subsequently from the design specifications. For
design of a wavelength router the procedure is slightly different
(see Section IV-A).
• Receiver Spacing : We start with the crosstalk specification, which puts a lower limit on the receiver spacing
. As with todays technology crosstalk levels lower than
30 to 35 dB are difficult to realize it does not make
sense to design the array for much lower crosstalk. To
be on the safe side we take a margin of 5–10 dB and

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

241

(a)
(a)

(b)

(b)

Fig. 5. Zero-birefringent waveguide structures: (a) Buried waveguide, and
(b) raised-strip waveguide.

Fig. 4. Phased-array waveguide geometries.

read from Fig. 3(a) the ratio
required for 40 dB
crosstalk level. It is noted that the crosstalk for TEand TM-polarization may be different because the lateral
index contrast and, consequently, the lateral -parameter
can differ substantially for the two polarizations.
: From the maximum acceptable excess
• FPR Length
loss for the outer channel (the nonuniformity
) we
determine the maximum acceptable dispersion angle
using (8) and (9). The minimal length
of the free propagation region (FPR) then follows as
in which
is the -coordinate of the outer receiver
(see Fig. 1(b)).
• Length Increment
: First we compute the required
dispersion of the array from
[see (3)]. The waveguide spacing
in the array aperture
should be chosen as small as possible (a large spacing will
lead to high coupling losses from the FPR to the array and
vice versa). With
and
fixed the divergence angle
between the array waveguides is fixed:
[see Fig. 1(b)] and the length increment
of the array
follows from (3).
• Aperture Width : The angular half width of the array
aperture should be determined using a graph as Fig. 3(b)
(adapted for the specific waveguide structure used).
• Number of Array Waveguides
: The choice of
fixes
.
the number of array waveguides:
This completes the determination of the most important geometrical parameters of the PHASAR. For the array waveguides
a number of different shapes can be applied to realize the
length increment
. Takahashi et al. [88] used the geometry
as depicted in Fig. 4(a) which is very simple from a design
point of view, with a constant for all array arms. Smit [59]
and Dragone [27] applied the geometry of Fig. 4(b), which
contains a minimum number of waveguide junctions. This
is especially important in semiconductor waveguides where
junction losses and mode conversion at junctions can degrade
the PHASAR performance.
The freedom in the choice of the array shape is bounded
by the requirement that the array waveguides should not come
too close to each other. For low-dispersion values, e.g., for
duplexing 1.3 and 1.55 m, the shapes as depicted in Fig. 4
are not suitable; the array waveguides come too close together
or will even intersect. Adar et al. [1] applied S-bend like arrays
in which the dispersion of one curved section is reduced by
a second section with opposite curvature and, consequently,
opposite
. More complex shapes have been reported, too
[44], [45].

C. Design for Polarization Independence
Several methods can be applied for eliminating the polarization dependence of the response due to waveguide birefringence. Five different methods will be discussed
1) Nonbirefringent Waveguides: The most obvious way
to make a PHASAR polarization independent is by
eliminating the birefringence of the waveguide. This
can be done by making the waveguide cross section
square if the index contrast is the same in the vertical and lateral direction as, for example, in buried
waveguide structures. Small deviations of the square
shape, for example due to nonperfect control of the
waveguide width, will disturb the polarization independence. If the index contrast between core and cladding
is high the tolerance requirements on waveguide width
control become impractically tight. Tolerant design
requires, therefore, low-contrast waveguides with a relatively large waveguide core (which is advantageous for
achieving low-fiber coupling loss). Bellcore [8], [63] recently reported a polarization independent device based
on a buried InGaAsP–InP waveguide structure with a
low-contrast waveguide core (small GaAs-fraction), as
shown in Fig. 5(a). Philips and TU Delft [6], [13]–[15],
[62], [96] reported several devices based on a raised
strip guide [shown in Fig. 5(b)] using similar material
for the waveguide core. The birefringence induced by
the asymmetry in lateral and vertical index contrast,
which occurs in this waveguide, was compensated by
a small correction of the aspect ratio (height/width) of
the waveguide core. An advantage of the raised strip
guide is that, due to the high lateral index contrast, it
allows for very short bending radii and, consequently,
compact design.
Attempts have been made to compensate the birefringence of conventional “flat” waveguide structures
by applying strained MQW-waveguides. Compressive
strain, obtained by increasing the Ga-fraction, increases
the birefringence, whereas tensile strain reduces it. First
results of this method show that polarization dispersion
changes in the order of 7–12 nm are possible [98].
A complication of this approach is that the intrinsic
birefringence of MQW-structures is considerably higher
than that of quaternary bulk material and requires
very high strains to be compensated. This makes the
approach very sensitive to well-width and composition
control.

242

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of the birefringence compensation principle.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of the different diffraction orders at the receiver
side for both states of polarization: Polarization dispersion.

The birefringence problem occurs also in silica-based
waveguides, where it is due to strain induced by the
different thermal expansion coefficients of silica and
silicon. It can be reduced by using silica substrates
instead of silicon substrates [78].
2) Order Matching: The first attempt to make PHASAR’s
polarization independent was based on matching the
FSR to the polarization dispersion as shown in Fig. 6
[66], [71], [94], [95], [107].
If the FSR is chosen equal to the polarization dispersion the th-order beam for TE will overlap with the
TM-polarized beam of order
1, which makes the
response virtually polarization independent. From (6), it
is seen that this is obtained by choosing
(17)
For this design the procedure described in Section III-B
should be slightly changed. By fixing the incremental
length according to (17) the divergence angle
is
fixed through (3) and
through
[see
being fixed in this way the nonuniformity
Fig. 1(b)].
can no longer be freely chosen. A disadvantage of
this method is that the total wavelength span available

for the WDM channels is limited by the polarization dispersion which is in the order of 4–5 nm for conventional
InGaAsP–InP DH structures. Another disadvantage is
that the exact value of the polarization dispersion is
very sensitive to variations in layer composition and
thickness, which makes it difficult to obtain a good
match.
3) Halfwave Plate: A very elegant method is the insertion
of a
-plate in the middle of the phased array.
Light entering the array in TE-polarized state will be
converted by the
-plate and travel through the second half of the array in TM-polarized state, and TMpolarized light will similarly traverse half the array
in TE-state. As a consequence TE- and TM-polarized
input signals will experience the same phase transfer
regardless of the birefringence properties of the waveguides applied. This method was proposed by Takahashi
et al. [89] and using polyimide halfwave plates it has
been successfully applied to silica-based [33], [50] and
LiNbO -based devices [53], [54].
As the polyimide halfwave plates have a thickness of
more than 10 m, they are only applicable to waveguide
structures with a small NA that can bridge this distance
with small diffraction losses. In semiconductor waveguides, the method is not practical due to the large NA
of these waveguides. It could be applied successfully
there too if a compact and fabrication tolerant integrated
polarization converter can be developed.
4) Dispersion Compensation: In semiconductor-based
PHASAR’s a broad-band solution for the polarization
dependence problem is found in compensation of the
polarization dispersion by inserting a waveguide section
with a different birefringence in the phased array. The
method was proposed for silica-based waveguides by
Takahashi et al. [90] and successfully applied to InPbased devices by Zirngibl et al. [114].
The operation can be explained by considering the
phase transfer difference
between two adjacent
waveguides, in one of which a section with length
with a different birefringence is inserted (see Fig. 7)
(18)
and
are the effective mode indices
in which
of the original waveguide and the compensation section. It is easily verified that
becomes polarization
independent if
is chosen according to
(19)
and
are the differences between the TE
in which
and the TM-value of
and , respectively. The whole

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

243

(a)
Fig. 8. Application of a polarization splitter at the input.

array can be made polarization independent by inserting
in the first waveguide,
in
a section with length
the second one,
in the third one, and so on. The
compensation section will thus obtain a triangular shape
and its total length will amount to
, in which
is the number of array waveguides. The method applies
for both positive and negative values of
. For
values close to 1, the compensation section will become
excessively long. A disadvantage is that
and
are
very sensitive to film thickness and waveguide width,
so that the compensation requires tight control of these
parameters.
5) Polarization Splitter: Another method for obtaining polarization independence is by applying a polarization
splitter at the input, as shown in Fig. 8. Due to the
polarization dispersion the position of the focal spot in
the image plane for TE polarization is shifted relative
to the TM-polarized one. If the distance between the
TE and the TM-polarized receiver in the object plane is
chosen equal to the polarization dispersion in the image
plane, the TE and TM-polarized signals will focus on the
same position and the response will become polarization
independent over a broad wavelength range. The method
does not apply to
devices.
D. Design for Flattened Response
In many applications, a flattened passband is important in
order to relax the requirements on wavelength control. Three
methods to achieve this goal will be discussed.
1) Multimode Receiver Guideş. The most simple method
is the use of broad (multimode) waveguides at the
receiver side [5], [66], [67], [74], [75]. If the focal
spot moves along these broad receivers almost 100%
of the light will be coupled into the receiver over a
considerable part of the receiver aperture, thus causing
a flat region in the frequency response as shown in
Fig. 9(a). In this way, the 1-dB bandwidth can easily
be increased from 31% of the channel spacing, as
shown in Section II-D for a nonflattened PHASAR, to
more than 65%.

(b)
Fig. 9. Flattening of the wavelength response by (a) using multimode
receiver waveguides, and (b) applying an MMI-powersplitter at the transmitter
side. The dashed lines indicate the response without flattening.

Due to the multimode character of the receiver
waveguides this method can only be applied at the
receiver side of a WDM-link, where the multimode
waveguides can be coupled to a detector without
additional signal loss.
2) MMI-Flattening: A flattened response with single-mode
outputs can be obtained by applying a short multimode interference (MMI) power splitter at the end of
the transmitter waveguide [7], [64], [65]. This device
converts the single waveguide mode at the input of
the cou-pler into a double image. The resulting output
field pattern has a “camel-like” shape and the depth of
the central depression can be controlled with the MMI
width. If the image of this “camel-shaped” field moves
along the single mode receivers the response will have
a flat region as shown in Fig. 9(b). This method of
flattening introduces insertion loss due to the mismatch
between the “camel-shaped” focal field and the receiver
mode.
A similar effect can be obtained by applying a junction and bringing the two output branches close
together in the transmitter aperture. This method is less
compact and less robust, however.
3) Shaping the Phase Transfer: As the field in the image
plane is the Fourier transform of the field at the output

244

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

(a)

(a)

(b)
Fig. 10. Fields at the input (dashed) and the output aperture (solid) of the
phased array for (a) a waveguide structure with strong confinement, and (b)
a structure with moderate confinement. For efficient coupling to the receiver
waveguides the output field should follow the dashed lines.

aperture, a more or less rectangular field can be realized
if the field at the output aperture has a
distribution ( measured along the aperture). Such a
sinc distribution can be approximated in a discrete
manner by multiplying the field at the array aperture
with a function with alternating sign, in such a way that
the Gaussian-like field is converted into a
-like
field with positive and negative sidelobes. The multiplication can be realized by inserting an additional half
wavelength in the array waveguides terminating in the
negative sidelobe regions or by increasing the optical
length using thermo-optic or photo-elastic effects [46].

E. Design for Low Loss
For properly designed PHASAR’s realized with low-loss
waveguides the total loss is dominated by the loss occurring
at the junctions between the array and the FPR. Low losses
can be obtained if the transition from the array to the FPR is
adiabatical, i.e., if the gap between the waveguides reduces linearly to zero. Due to the finite resolution of the lithographical
process the gap between the waveguides will stop abruptly,
however, when the waveguides come too close together. At
this discontinuity the field coming out of the array will show
a modulation that is dependent on the width of the gap between
the array waveguides and on the confinement of the field in the
guides. Fig. 10 shows the field for a large and a smaller gap.
Due to the ripple in the field pattern a considerable fraction
of the power will diffract into adjacent orders and be lost.
On reciprocity grounds an equal loss will occur at the input
aperture.
To reduce this loss, the ripple of the output field should
be reduced. This can be obtained by reducing the gap width
(which requires better lithography) or by reducing the confine-

(b)
Fig. 11. Schematic diagram illustrating the operation of a wavelength router:
(a) Interconnectivity scheme (ai denotes the signal at input port a with
frequency i) and (b) frequency response.

ment of the waveguides. A disadvantage of the latter approach
is that lowering the confinement increases the minimal bending
radius and, consequently, increases the device size. Low
confinement can be combined with small bending radii by
applying a local contrast reduction near the array apertures
using a double-etch process [23].
IV. APPLICATIONS
In addition to the basic functions of wavelength multiplexing and demultiplexing, PHASAR’s are applied in wavelength
routers and, in combination with other components such as
amplifiers and switches, in more complex devices for use
in multiwavelength networks. In this section a number of
applications will be discussed.
A. Wavelength Routers
Wavelength routers were first reported by Dragone [27],
[28]. They provide an important additional functionality as
compared to multiplexers and demultiplexers and play a key
role in more complex devices as add-drop multiplexers and
wavelength switches. Fig. 11 illustrates their functionality.
Wavelength routers have input and output ports. Each of
the
input ports can carry
different frequencies. The
frequencies carried by input channel 1 are distributed among
output channels 1 to , in such a way that output channel
1 carries frequency
and channel
frequency 1. The
frequencies carried by input 2 are distributed in the same

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

way, but cyclically rotated by 1 channel in such a way that
frequencies 1–3 are coupled to ports 3–1 and frequency 4 to
port 4. In this way each output channel receives
different
frequencies, one from each input channel. To realize such an
interconnectivity scheme in a strictly nonblocking way using a
single frequency a huge number of switches would be required.
Using a wavelength router, this functionality can be achieved
using only one single component.
A wavelength router is obtained by designing the input and
the output side of a PHASAR symmetrically, i.e., with
input and output ports. For the cyclical rotation of the input
frequencies along the output ports, as described above, it is
essential that the frequency response is periodical as shown in
Fig. 11(b), which implies that the FSR should equal
times
the channel spacing. From (6), it is seen that this is obtained
by choosing
(20)

is the group index of the waveguide mode,
in which
is the number of frequency channels and
is the channel
spacing. For this design the procedure described in Section IIIB should be changed in a similar way as described in Section
III-C-2. By fixing the incremental length according to (20)
the divergence angle
is fixed through (3) and
through
[see Fig. 1(b)]. With this choice of the FSR
the nonuniformity
is fixed and will be in the order of 3
dB, which can be seen as follows. Channels at a frequency
away from the central frequency will experience
an excess loss
of at least 3 dB because the focal spot
corresponding to this frequency will be equally divided among
two orders which focus symmetrically around the center of the
image plane. As in a periodical design the frequency spacing
between the outer channels comes close to the FSR, the outer
channels will experience an excess loss
in the order of 3
dB.
Wavelength routers have been applied in various configurations in add-drop multiplexers and wavelength selective
switches [29], [30], [37], [38], [49], [68], [79]–[83] and in
multiwavelength networks [31]. In combination with a DFB
laser used as a wavelength converter a wavelength router has
also been applied as a wavelength switch [68], [72].
B. Multiwavelength Receivers
A multiwavelength receiver is obtained by integration of
a demultiplexer with a photodiode array. The first PHASAR
receiver, reported in 1993 by Amersfoort et al. [3], [4], applied
a twinguide waveguide structure in which the passive region
was obtained by locally removing the absorbing top layer. Integrated receivers have also been realized in buried waveguide
structures [113] and in polarization independent raised-strip
waveguides [6], [62]. A wavelength-flattened receiver module
hybridly integrated with a silicon bipolar frontend array has
been reported by Steenbergen et al. [74], [75], [76]. Recently,
a low-loss (3 dB on-chip loss) ei-channel WDM receiver with
10 GHz bandwidth per channel has been reported [77].

245

Fig. 12. Integrated multiwavelength laser.

C. Multiwavelength Lasers
Todays WDM systems use wavelength-selected or tunable
lasers as sources. Multiplexing of a number of wavelengths
into one fiber is done using a power combiner or a wavelength
multiplexer. Integrated multiwavelength lasers have been realized by combining a DFB-laser array (with a linear frequency
spacing) with a power combiner on a single chip [9], [103],
[104].
Using a power combiner for multiplexing the different
wavelengths in a single fiber is a very tolerant method but
dB,
being the number of
it introduces a loss of 10
wavelength channels. The combination loss can be reduced by
applying a wavelength multiplexer at the cost of more stringent
requirements on the control of the laser wavelengths, however.
An elegant solution to this problem is combining a
broad-band optical amplifier array with a multiplexer into
a Fabry–Perot cavity as depicted in Fig. 12. This principle
was first demonstrated in the MAGIC-laser [100] in a
hybridly integrated form. If one of the semiconductor optical
amplifiers (SOA’s) is excited the device will start lasing
at the passband maximum of the multiplexer channel to
which the SOA is connected. All SOA’s can be operated
and (intensity) modulated simultaneously, in principle. An
important advantage of this component is that the wavelength
channels are automatically tuned to the passbands of the
multiplexer and coupled to the single output port with low loss.
Zirngibl and Joyner reported the first multiwavelength lasers
based on integration of a SOA-array with a PHASAR [39],
[108], [110] and demonstrated it in a 9 200 Mb/s transmission experiment [113]. Despite of their long cavity length these
lasers show single mode operation in a wide range of operating
conditions [112]. Direct modulations speeds in excess of 1
Gb/s were recently reported [115]. Power coupled into a fiber
is still low. Highest power reported so far is 0.15 mW [70],
[73].
Joyner et al. [41] reported integration of a MW-laser with
an electroabsorption modulator. They used the power radiated
into an adjacent order of the phased array to couple light out
of the cavity into the modulator.
A problem in MW-lasers with a small FSR is that the laser
may start lasing in a wrong order and, consequently, at a
wrong frequency. Doerr et al. [26] proposed and demonstrated
a method to suppress the transmission for undesired orders by
in the array.
chirping the incremental length
Tachikawa et al. [83] reported a 32-channel discretely
tunable laser based on a 4 8 PHASAR with 12 SOA’s with

246

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

(a)

(b)

Fig. 14. MMI-based PHASAR configuration.
TABLE I
PHASE DIFFERENCES 'ij BETWEEN INPUT PORT i AND j , REQUIRED FOR POWER
RECOMBINATION IN THE DIFFERENT OUTPUT PORTS OF A
MMI COUPLER

1

424

(c)
Fig. 13. Three different ADM configurations: (a) Loop-back, (b) fold-back,
and (c) cascaded demux/mux.

one reflecting mirror connected to both the 4-input and the 8output ports. The 32 wavelengths are generated by powering
the proper SOA pairs.
D. Wavelength-Selective Switches and Add–Drop Multiplexers
Add-drop multiplexers (ADM’s) form a special class of
wavelength selective switches. They are used for coupling one
or more wavelength signals from a main input port to one
or more drop ports by operating the corresponding switches.
Simultaneously, the other signals are routed to the main output
port, together with the signals applied at the proper add ports.
In Fig. 13(a) the configuration as realized by Tachikawa et
al. [80], [82], [85] is shown. The realized device (hybridly
integrated, in which the switching was done by changing fiber
connectors), showed a fiber-to-fiber insertion loss of 3–4 dB
for the add/drop signals and 6–8 dB for the transmitted signals.
By a suitable arrangement of the loop-back optical paths the
insertion loss difference between the transmitted signals can
be minimized [35].
A disadvantage of this loop-back configuration is that the
crosstalk of the PHASAR is coupled directly into the main
output port. This problem can be reduced by applying the
PHASAR in a fold-back configuration as shown in Fig. 13(b)
[29], [37]. A third approach is using a separate demultiplexer
and multiplexer [Fig. 13(c)] as reported by Okamoto et al.
[48], [49], [52]. The two PHASAR’s employed in this approach were placed close together in order to ensure that their
channel frequencies match.
In wavelength routed networks, spatial switching of arbitrary wavelength signals between multiple channels allows for
efficient use of the transmission capacity using a fixed number
of wavelengths and re-using them. For this approach, a number
of configurations using silica-based waveguide structures have
been reported [36], [37], [79].

V. MMI-BASED PHASAR’s
Recently, a novel type of PHASAR-based on MMI-couplers
was proposed and experimentally demonstrated on InP [22],
and a design for a low-contrast waveguide structure has been
proposed [42]. It is obtained by replacing the FPR’s of the
“classical” PHASAR by MMI-couplers. Fig. 14 shows three
different realizations. The operation can be understood as
follows. Conventional MMI-couplers divide the power applied
to an input port equally among all
output ports [61], but
with a different phase for each port [10]. To each input port
corresponds a specific set of phases at the output port. If
signals with this specific phase set (with a minus sign)
are applied to the input port all power will recombine in the
corresponding output port, due to reciprocity. This is shown
in Table I. If we apply, for example, four signals with equal
amplitude and phase differences
,
and
of
45 , 180 , and 135 between between ports 1 and 2, ports
2 and 3, and ports 3 and 4, respectively, the power will
constructively recombine in port 1. If we increase
,
and
with
, 180 , and 270 , respectively, the
output signal will move to port 2. If the phase the phase
differences are increased with the same amounts the signal
moves to port 4, then to port 3, and then to port 1 again, and
so on.
We will go through this sequence when the frequency is
swept if the four branches of the MMI-PHASAR have length
differences
,
, and
which are related as
1 : 2 : 3. These length differences can be obtained in different
ways, as shown in Fig. 14.
The characteristics of MMI-PHASAR’s differ from the
classical PHASAR’s in the following repsects:
• the response is inherently periodical;
• the channel response is very uniform (some nonuni-

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

formity is incurred by the transfer properties of the
MMI-couplers);
• the low-crosstalk window is very narrow, which makes
the component very sensitive to fabrication tolerances;
• flattening of the response is not possible.
For small numbers of wavelength channels MMI-PHASAR’s
can be very compact (e.g., 2800 m
100 m for a fourchannel demux [22]). The critical crosstalk preformance makes
the device less attractive for applications as mux, demux or
wavelength router. For application in a multiwavelength laser,
where crosstalk performance is less relevant, the component
has interesting properties. In this application, “chirping” of the
array will be required in order to suppress undesired orders
[26].
VI. CONCLUSION
The application of PHASAR-based devices is rapidly broadening. PHASAR’s have proven to be flexible components
which support realization of a broad class of functions for
use in multiwavelength networks. Silica-based devices offer
the best performance and are presently being most widely
applied. They might get some competition from polymer based
devices in the future. InP-based devices are most promising
for realization of active MW-devices such as MW-lasers
and receivers and, on the longer term, for more complicated
circuits containing large numbers of components, such as adddrops and optical crossconnects.
APPENDIX A
WAVEGUIDE MODE EFFECTIVE WIDTH
The diffraction properties of the phased array are conveniently expressed in terms of the effective mode width
defined as the width of a uniform intensity distribution with
the same maximum intensity and power content as the modal
field
(A.1)
Substitution of the expression for the (TE-polarized) modal
field [92] yields the following expression for
:
(A.2)
in which
is the waveguide width and
and
are
the normalized -parameter and the normalized transverse
attenuation constant, respectively. The rightmost expression,
which is found empirically by curve fitting in the range 1
10, gives us a simple expression for estimating the
effective width.
Substitution of the Gaussian distribution
into (A.1) yields the following relation between
and
.
(A.3)
Using (A.2) and (A.3), the modal field is easily “translated”
into an equivalent Gaussian field.

247

REFERENCES
[1] R. Adar, C. H. Henry, C. Dragone, R. C. Kistler, and M. A. Milbrodt, “Broad-band array multiplexers made with silica waveguides on
silicon,” J. Lightwave Technol.., vol. 11, pp. 212–219, Feb. 1993.
[2] M. R. Amersfoort, M. K. Smit, Y. S. Oei, B. H. Verbeek, P. F. H.
Groen, and E. G. Metaal, “Small-size, low-loss, 4-channel phasedarray wavelength division (de)multiplexer on InP,” in Proc. 6th Eur.
Conf. Integrated Optics (ECIO ‘93), Neuchatel, Switzerland, Apr. 18–22,
1993, pp. 2–5, postdeadline papers.
[3] M. R. Amersfoort, C. R. de Boer, Y. S. Oei, B. H. Verbeek, P. Demeester, F. H. Groen, and J. W. Pedersen, “High performance 4-channel
PHASAR wavelength demultiplexer integrated with photodetectors,” in
Proc. 19th Eur. Conf. Optical Communication (ECOC‘93), Montreux,
Switzerland, vol. 3, Sept. 12–16, 1993, pp. 49–52, postdeadline papers.
[4] M. R. Amersfoort, C. R. de Boer, B. H. Verbeek, P. Demeester, A.
Looyen, and J. J. G. M. van der Tol, “Low-loss phased-array based
4-channel wavelength demultiplexer integrated with photodetectors,”
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 62–64, Jan. 1994.
[5] M. R. Amersfoort, C. R. de Boer, F. P. G. M. van Ham, M. K.
Smit, P. Demeester, J. J. G. M. van der Tol, and A. Kuntze, “Phasedarray wavelength demultiplexer with flattened wavelength response,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 300–302, Feb. 1994.
[6] M. R. Amersfoort, J. B. D. Soole, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreakakis,
A. Rajhel, and C. Caneau, “8
2 nm polarization-independent WDM
detector based on compact arrayed waveguide demultiplexer,” Integrated Photonics Research 1995, Dana Point, CA, Feb. 23–25, 1995,
pp. PD3-1–PD3-2, postdeadline papers.
[7] M. R. Amersfoort, J. B. D. Soole, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreadakis,
A. Rajhel, and C. Caneau, “Passband broadening of integrated arrayed
waveguide filters using multimode interference couplers,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 449–451, Feb. 1996.
[8] M. R. Amersfoort, J. B. D. Soole, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreakakis, A.
Rahjel, C. Caneau, M. A. Koza, R. Bhat, C. Youtsey, and I. Adesida,
“Polarization-independent InP-arrayed waveguide filter using square
cross-section waveguides,” Optical Fiber Communication (OFC’96),
Tech. Dig. Ser., San Jose, CA, Feb. 25–Mar. 1, 1996, pp. 101–102.
[9] M. R. Amersfoort, C. E. Zah, B. Pathak, F. Favire, P. S. D. Lin, A.
Rahjel, N. C. Andreakakis, R. Bhat, C. Caneau, and M. A. Koza,
“Wavelength accuracy and output power of multiwavelength DFB laser
arrays with integrated star couplers and optical amplifiers,” Integrated
Photonics Research 1996, Boston, MA, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996, pp.
784–481.
[10] P. A. Besse, M. Bachmann, and H. Melchior, “Phase relations in
multi-mode interference couplers and their application to generalized
integrated Mach-Zehnder optical switches,” in Proc. 6th Eur. Conf.
Integrated Optics (ECIO’93), Neuchatel, Switzerland, Apr. 18–22, 1993,
pp. 2.22–2.23.
[11] H. Bissessur, F. Gaborit, B. Martin, P. Pagnod-Rossiaux, J.-L. Peyre, and
M. Renaud, “16 Channel phased array demultiplexer on InP with low
polarization sensitivity,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 336–337,
Feb. 1994.
[12] H. Bissessur, F. Gaborit, B. Martin, G. Ripoche, and P. PagnodRossiaux, “Tunable phased-array wavelength demultiplexer on InP,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 32–33, Jan. 1995.
[13] H. Bissessur, F. Gaborit, B. Martin, and G. Ripoche, “Polarizationindependent phased-array demultiplexer on InP with high fabrication
tolerance,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 16, pp. 1372–1373, Aug. 1995.
[14] H. Bissessur, B. Martin, R. Mestric, and F. Gaborit, “Small-size,
polarization-independent phased-array demultiplexers on InP,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 24, pp. 2118–2120, Nov. 1995.
[15] H. Bissessur, P. Pagnod-Rossiaux, R. Mestric, and B. Martin, “Extremely small polarization independent phased-array demultiplexers on
InP,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 554–556, Apr. 1996.
[16] C. A. Brackett, “Dense wavelength division multiplexing networks:
Principles and applications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 8,
pp. 948–964, 1990.
[17] C. A. Brackett, A. S. Acampora, J. Sweitzer, G. Tangonan, M. T.
Smith, W. Lennon, K. C. Wang, and R. H. Hobbs, “A scalable
multiwavelength multihop optical network: A proposal for research
on all-optical networks,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 11, pp. 736–753,
May/June 1993.
[18] T. Brenner, C. H. Joyner, M. Zirngibl, and C. Doerr, “Compact
waveguide grating array de-multiplexer,” Integrated Photonics Research
1996, Boston, MA, pp. PDP3-1–PDP3-3, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996, postdeadline papers.
[19] K. S. Chiang, “Dispersion characteristics of strip dielectric waveguides,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 39, pp. 349–352, Feb. 1991.

2

248

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

[20] P. C. Clemens, G. Heise, R. Marz, H. Michel, A. Reichelt, and H.
W. Schneider, “Optical phased array in SiO2 /Si with adaptable center
wavelength,” in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Inegrated Optics (ECIO ‘95), Delft,
The Netherlands, Apr. 3–6, 1995, pp. 505–508.
[21] P. C. Clemens, G. Heise, R. Marz, A. Reichelt, and H. W. Schneider,
“Wavelength-adaptable optical phased array in SiO2 -Si,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 1040–1041, Oct. 1995.
[22] C. van Dam, M. R. Amerfsoort, G. M. ten Kate, F. P. G. M. van Ham, M.
K. Smit, P.A. Besse, M. Bachmann, and H. Melchior, “Novel InP-based
phased-array wavelength demultiplexer using a generalized MMI-MZI
configuration,” in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Integrated Optics (ECIO’95),
Delft, The Netherlands, Apr. 3–6, 1995, pp. 275–278.
[23] C. van Dam, A. A. M. Staring, E. J. Jansen, J. J. M. Binsma, T.
van Dongen, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek, “Loss reduction for
phased-array demultiplexers using a double etch technique,” Integrated
Photonics Research 1996, Boston, MA, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996, pp.
52–55.
[24] S. Day, J. P. Stagg, D. Moule, S. J. Clemens, C. Rogers, S. Ohja,
T. Clapp, J. Brook, and J. Morley, “The elimination of sidelobes in
the arrayed waveguide WDM,” Integrated Photonics Research 1996,
Boston, MA, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996, pp. 48–51.
[25] C. R. Doerr, M. Zirngibl, and C. H. Joyner, “Chirping of the waveguide
grating router for free-spectral-range mode selection in the multifrequency laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 500–502, Apr.
1996.
[26] C. R. Doerr, M. Zirngibl, and C. H. Joyner, “Chirping of the waveguide
grating router for free-spectral-range mode selection in the multifrequency laser,” Integrated Photonics Research 1996, Boston, MA, pp.
132–135, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996.
[27] C. Dragone, “An
optical multiplexer using a planar arrangement
of two star couplers,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 3, pp. 812–815,
Sept. 1991.
[28] C. Dragone, C. A. Edwards, and R. C. Kistler, “Integrated optics
multiplexer on silicon,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 3,
pp. 896–899, Oct. 1991.
[29] M. Fukui, K. Oda, H. Toba, K. Okamoto, and M. Ishii, “10 channel
10Gbit/s WDM add/ drop multiplexing/transmission experiment over
240 km of dispersion-shifted fiber employing unequally-spaced arrayedwaveguide-grating ADM filter with fold-back configuration,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 20, pp. 1757–1759, Sept. 1995.
[30] B. Glance, I. P. Kaminow, and R. W. Wilson, “Applications of the
integrated waveguide grating router,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 12,
pp. 957–962, June 1994.
[31] B. R. Hemenway, M. L. Stevens, D. M. Castagozzi, D. Marquis, S.
A. Parikh, J. J. Carney, S. G. Finn, E. A. Swanson, I. P Kaminow, C.
Dragone, U. Koren, T. L. Koch, R. Thomas, C. Zveren, and E. Grella,
“A 20-channel wavelength-routed all-optical network deployed in the
Boston Metro area,” Optical Fiber Communication (OFC’95), Tech.
Dig. Ser., San Diego, CA, Feb. 26–Mar. 3, 1995, pp. PD8-1–PD8-5,
postdeadline papers.
[32] Y. Hida, Y. Innoue, and S. Imamura, “Polymeric arrayed-waveguide
grating multiplexer operating around 1.3 m,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30,
no. 12, pp. 959–960, June 1994.
[33] Y. Innoue, Y. Ohmori, M. Kawachi, S. Ando, T. Sawada, and H.
Takahashi, “Polarization mode converter with polyimide half waveplate
in silica-based planar lightwave circuits,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett.,
vol. 6, pp. 626–628, May 1994.
[34] Y. Inoue, A. Himeno, K. Moriwaki, and M. Kawachi, “Silica-based
arrayed-waveguide grating circuit as optical splitter/router,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 726–727, Apr. 1995.
[35] O. Ishida and H. Takahashi, “Loss-imbalance equalization of arrayedwaveguide grating add-drop multiplexer,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, no.
14, pp. 1160–1162, July 1994.
[36] O. Ishida, H. Takahashi, and Y. Inoue, “FDM-channel selection filter
employing an arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 30, no. 16, pp. 1327–1328, Aug. 1994.
[37] O. Ishida, H. Takahashi, S. Suzuki, and Y. Innoue, “Multichannel
frequency-selective switch employing an arrayed-waveguide grating
multiplexer with fold-back optical paths,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett.,
vol. 6, pp. 1219–1221, Oct. 1994.
[38] O. Ishida, T. Hasegawa, M. Ishii, S. Suzuki, and K. Iwashita, “4
4, 7-FDM-channel reconfigurable network hub emplying arrayedwaveguide-grating (AWG) multiplexers,” Optical Fiber Communication
(OFC’95), Tech. Dig. Ser., San Diego, USA, Feb. 26–Mar. 3, 1995, pp.
PD9-1–PD9-5, postdeadline papers.
[39] C. H. Joyner, M. Zirngibl, and J. P. Meester, “A multifrequency
waveguide grating laser by selective area epitaxy,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 1277–1279, Nov. 1994.

N 2N

N 2N
2

2

[40] C. H. Joyner, M. Zirngibl, and J. C. Centanni, “An 8 channel digitally
tunable transmitter with electroabsorption modulated output by selective
area epitaxy,” Integrated Photonics Research 1995, Dana Point, CA,
Feb. 23–25, 1995, pp. PD2-2–PD2-4, postdeadline papers.
, “An 8-channel digitally tunable transmitter with electroabsorp[41]
tion modulated output by selective-area epitaxy,” IEEE Photon. Technol.
Lett., vol. 7, pp. 1013–1015, Sept. 1995.
[42] L. O. Lierstuen and A. Sudbo, “8-channel wavelength division multiplexer based on multimode interference couplers,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 1034–1036, Sept. 1995.
[43] R. März, Integrated Optics: Design and Modeling. Norwood, MA:
Artech House, 1994.
[44] R. Mestric, H. Bissessur, B. Martin, and A. Pinquier, “1.31–1.55-m
phased-array demultiplexer on InP,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol.
8, pp. 638–640, May 1996.
[45] aR. Mestric, M. Renaud, B. G. Martin, and F. Gaborit, “Extremely
compact 1.31–1.55 m phased array duplexer on InP with 30 dB
crosstalk over 100 nm,” in Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf. Optical Communication (ECOC’96), Oslo, Sweden, Sept. 15–19, 1996, pp. 3.131–3.134.
[46] K. Okamoto and H. Yamada, “Arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer
with flat spectral response,” Opt. Lett., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 43–45, Jan.
1995.
[47] K. Okamoto, K. Moriwaki, and S. Suzuki, “Fabrication of 64 64
arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer on silicon,” Electron. Lett., vol.
31, no. 3, pp. 184–186, Feb. 1995.
[48] K. Okamoto, K. Takiguchi, and Y. Ohmori, “16ch optical add/drop
multiplexer using silica-based arrayed-waveguide gratings,” Optical
Fiber Communication (OFC’95), Tech. Dig. Ser., San Diego, CA, Feb.
26–Mar. 3, 1995, pp. PD10-1–PD10-5, postdeadline papers.
[49] K. Okamoto, K. Takiguchi, and Y. Ohmori, “16-channel add/drop
multiplexer using silica-based arrayed-waveguide gratings,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 723–724, Apr. 1995.
[50] K. Okamoto, M. Ishii, Y. Hibino, and H. Toba, “Fabrication of unequal channel spacing arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer modules,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 17, pp. 1464–1465, Aug. 1995.
[51] K. Okamoto, M. Ishii, Y. Hibino, and Y. Ohmori, “Fabrication of
variable bandwidth filters using arrayed-waveguide gratings,” Electron.
Lett., vol. 31, no. 18, pp. 1592–1594, Aug. 1995.
[52] K. Okamoto, M. Okuno, A. Himeno, and Y. Ohmori, “16-channel optical
add/drop multiplexer consisting of arrayed-waveguide gratings and
double-gate switches,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 16, pp. 1471–1472,
Aug. 1996.
[53] H. Okayama and M. Kawahara, “Waveguide array grating demultiplexer
on LiNbO3 ,” Integrated Photonics Research 1995, Dana Point, CA, pp.
296–298, Feb. 23–25, 1995.
[54] H. Okayama, M. Kawahara, and T. Kamijoh, “Reflective waveguide
array demultiplexer in LiNbO3 ,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 14, pp.
985–990, June 1996.
[55] E. C. M. Pennings, J. Van Schoonhoven, J. W. M. Van Uffelen, and M.
K. Smit, “Reduced bend-ing and scattering losses in new optical ‘doubleridge’ waveguide,” Electron. Lett., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 746–747, May
1989.
[56] E. C. M. Pennings, M. K. Smit, and G. D. Khoe, “Micro-Optic
versus waveguide devices—An Overview,” invited paper, in Proc.
Fifth MicroOptics Conf. 1995, Hiroshima, Japan, Oct. 18–20, 1995, pp.
248–255.
[57] E. C. M. Pennings, M. K. Smit, A. A. M. Staring, and G.-D. Khoe,
“Integrated-Optics versus Micro-Optics—A comparison,” Integrated
Photonics Research IPR’96, Boston, MA, Tech. Dig., vol. 6, Apr.
29–May 2, 1996, pp. 460–463.
[58] M. K. Smit, “Now focussing and dispersive planar component based on
an optical phased array,” Electron. Lett., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 385–386,
Mar. 1988.
[59]
, “Optical phased arrays,” in Integrated Optics in Silicon-Based
Aluminum Oxide, Ph.D. thesis, Delft Univ. of Technol., 1991, ch 6.
[60] L. B. Soldano, M. Bouda, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek, “New
small-size single-mode optical power splitter based on multi-mode
interference,” in Proc. 18th Eur. Conf. Optical Communiction (ECOC
‘92), Berlin, Germany, Sept. 27–Oct. 1, 1992, pp. 465–468.
[61] L. B. Soldano and E. C. M. Pennings, “Optical multi-mode interference devices based on self-imaging: principles and applications,” J.
Lightwave Technol., vol. 13, pp. 615–627, Apr. 1995.
[62] J. B. D. Soole, M. R. Amersfoort, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreadakis,
A. Rajhel, and C. Caneau, “Polarization-independent monolithic eightchannel 2 nm spacing WDM receiver detector based on compact
arrayed waveguide demultiplexer,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 15, pp.
1289–1291, July 1995.
[63] J. B. D. Soole, M. R. Amersfoort, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreadakis, A.

0

2

SMIT AND VAN DAM: PHASAR-BASED WDM-DEVICES: PRINCIPLES, DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

Rajhel, C. Caneau, M. A. Koza, R. Bhat, C. Youtsey, and I. Adesida,
“Polarization-independent InP arrayed waveguide filter using square
cross-section waveguides,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 323–324,
Feb. 1996.
[64] J. B. D. Soole, M. R. Amersfoort, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreakakis,
A. Rajhel, C. Caneau, R. Bhat, and M. A. Koza, “Use of multimode
interference couplers to broaden the passband of dispersive integrated
WDM filters,” Integrated Photonics Research 1996, Boston, MA, Apr.
29–May 2, 1996, pp. 44–47.
[65] J. B. D. Soole, M. R. Amersfoort, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreadakis, A.
Rajhel, C. Caneau, R. Bhat, M. A. Koza, C. Youtsey, and I. Adesida,
“Use of multimode interference couplers to broaden the passband of
wavelength-dispersive integrated WDM filters,” IEEE Photon. Technol.
Lett., vol. 8, pp. 1340–1342, Oct. 1996.
[66] L. H. Spiekman, F. P. G. M. van Ham, A. Kuntze, J.W. Pedersen,
P. Demeester, and M. K. Smit, “Polarization-independent InP-based
phased-array wavelength demultiplexer with flattened wavelength response,” in Proc. 20th Eur. Conf. Optical Communication (ECOC’94),
Firenze, Italy, Sept. 25–29, 1994, pp. 759–762.
[67] L. H. Spiekman, A. H. de Vreede, F. P. G. M. van Ham, A. Kuntze,
J. J. G. M. Van der Tol, P. Demeester, and M. K. Smit, “Flattened
response ensures polarization independence of InGaAsP/InP phased
array wavelength demultiplexer,” in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Integrated
Optics (ECIO’95), Delft, The Netherlands, Apr. 3–6, 1995, pp. 517–520.
[68] L. H. Spiekman, A. A. M. Staring, C. van Dam, E. J. Jansen, J. J.
M. Binsma, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek, “Space-switching using
wavelength conversion at 2.5 Gb/s and integrated phased array routing,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Optical Communications (ECOC’95), Brussels,
Belgium, Sept. 17–21, 1995, pp. 1055–1058, postdeadline papers.
[69] L. H. Spiekman, M. B. J. Diemeer, T. H. Hoekstra, and M. K. Smit,
“First polymeric phased array wavelength demultiplexer operating at
1550 nm,” Integrated Photonics Research 1996, Boston, MA, Apr.
29–May 2, 1996, pp. 36–39.
[70] L. H. Spiekman, A. A. M. Staring, J. J. M. Binsma, E. J. Jansen,
T. van Dongen, P. J. A. Thijs, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek,
“A compact phased array based multi-wavelength laser,” Integrated
Photonics Research 1996, Boston, MA, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996, pp.
136–138.
[71] L. H. Spiekman, M. R. Amersfoort, A. H. de Vreede, F. P. G. M.
van Ham, A. Kuntze, J. W. Pedersen, P. Demeester, and M. K.
Smit, “Design and realization of polarization independent phased array
wavelength demultiplexers using different array orders for TE and TM,”
J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 14, pp. 991–995, June 1996.
[72] A. A. M. Staring, L. H. Spiekman, C. van Dam, E. J. Jansen, J. J.
M. Binsma, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek, “Space-switching 2.5
Gbit/s signals using wavelength conversion and phased array routing,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 377–379, Feb. 1996.
[73] A. A. M. Staring, L. H. Spiekman, J. J. M. Binsma, E. J. Jansen, T. van
Dongen, P. J. A. Thijs, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek, “A compact
9 channel multi-wavelength laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 8,
pp. 1139–1141, Sept. 1996.
[74] C. A. M. Steenbergen, C. van Dam, T. L. M. Scholtes, A. H. de
Vreede, L. Shi, J. J. G. M. van der Tol, P. Demeester, and M. K.
Smit, “4-channel wavelength flattened demultiplexer integrated with
photodetectors,” in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Integrated Optics (ECIO ‘95),
Delft, The Netherlands, Apr. 3–6, 1995, pp. 271–274.
[75] C. A. M. Steenbergen, C. van Dam, A. H. de Vreede, L. Shi, J. W.
Pedersen, P. Demeester, and M. K. Smit, “Integrated 1 GHz 4-channel
InP phasar based WDM-receiver with Si bi-polar frontend array,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Optical Communications (ECOC’95), Brussels,
Belgium, Sept. 17–21, 1995, pp. 211–214.
[76] C. A. M. Steenbergen, M. O. van Deventer, L. C. N. de Vreede, C.
van Dam, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek, “System performance of a
4 channel phasar WDM receiver operating at 1.2 Gb/s,” Optical Fiber
Communication (OFC’96), Tech. Dig. Ser., San Jose, CA, Feb. 25–Mar.
1, 1996, pp. 310–311.
[77] C. A. M. Steenbergen, C. van Dam, A. Looijen, C. G. P. Herben, M.
de Kok, M. K. Smit, J. W. Pedersen, I. Moerman, R. G. Baets, and B.
H. Verbeek, “Compact low loss 8
10 GHz polarization independent
WDM receiver,” in Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf. Optical Communication
(ECOC’96), Oslo, Sweden, Sept. 15–19, 1996, pp. 1.129–1.132.
[78] S. Suzuki, Y. Innoue, and Y. Ohmori, “Polarization-insensitive arrayedwaveguide grating multiplexer with SiO2 -on-SiO2 structure,” El. Lett.,
vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 642–643, Apr. 1994.
[79] S. Suzuki, A. Himeno, Y. Tachikawa, and Y. Yamada, “Multichannel
optical wavelength selective switch with arrayed-waveguide grating
multiplexer,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, no. 13, pp. 1091–1092, June
1994.

2

249

[80] Y. Tachikawa, Y. Inoue, M. Kawachi, H. Takahashi, and K. Inoue,
“Arrayed-waveguide grating add-drop multiplexer with loop-back optical paths,” Electron. Lett., vol. 29, no. 24, pp. 2133–2134, Nov.
1993.
[81] Y. Tachikawa and M. Kawachi, “Lightwave transrouter based on arryedwaveguide grating multiplexer,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, no. 18, pp.
1504–1506, Sept. 1994.
[82] Y. Tachikawa, M. Ishii, Y. Inoue, and T. Nozawa, “Integrated-optic
arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexers with loop-back optical paths,”
in Proc. 7th Eur. Conf. Int. Opt. (ECIO ‘95), Delft, The Netherlands,
Apr. 3–6, 1995, pp. 267–270.
[83] Y. Tachikawa and K. Okamoto, “32 wavelength tunable arrayedwaveguide grating laser based on special input/output arrangement,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 19, pp. 1665–1666, Sept. 1995.
[84] Y. Tachikawa and Y. Inoue, “Tunable WDM-channel group drop filters
based on smart device configuration,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 23,
pp. 2029–2030, Nov. 1995.
[85] Y. Tachikawa, Y. Inoue, M. Ishii, and T. Nozawa, “Arreyed-waveguide
grating multiplexer with loop-back optical paths and its applications,”
J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 14, pp. 977–984, June 1996.
[86] K. Takada, Y. Inoue, H. Yamada, and M. Horiguchi, “Measurement
of phase error distributions in silica-based arrayed-waveguide grating
multiplexers by using Fourier transform spectroscopy,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 30, no. 20, pp. 1671–1672, Sept. 1994.
[87] H. Takahashi, S. Suzuki, K. Kato, and I. Nishi, “Arrayed-waveguide
grating for wavelength division multi/demultiplexer with nanometer
resolution,” Electron. Lett., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 87–88, Jan. 1990.
[88] H. Takahashi, I. Nishi, and Y. Hibino, “10 GHz spacing optical
frequency division multiplexer based on arrayed-waveguide grating,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 380–382, Feb. 1992.
[89] H. Takahashi, Y. Hibino, and I. Nishi, “Polarization-insensitive arrayedwaveguide grating wavelength multiplexer on silicon,” Opt. Lett., vol.
17, no. 7, pp. 499–501, Apr. 1992.
[90] H. Takahashi, Y. Hibino, Y. Ohmori, and M. Kawachi, “Polarizationinsensitive arrayed-waveguide wavelength demultiplexer with birefringence compensating film,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 5, pp.
707–709, June 1993.
[91] H. Takahashi, K. Oda, H. Toba, and Y. Inoue, “Transmission characteriswavelength multiplexer,” J. Lightwave
tics of arrayed waveguide
Technol., vol. 13, pp. 447–455, Mar. 1995.
[92] H. G. Unger, Planar Optical Waveguides and Fibers. Oxford, U.K.:
Clarendon Press, Oxford Engineering Science Series, 1977.
[93] A. R. Vellekoop and M. K. Smit, “Low-loss planar optical polarization
splitter with small dimensions,” Electron. Lett., vol. 25, pp. 946–947,
1989.
, “A polarization independent planar wavelength demulti- plexer
[94]
with small dimensions,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Opt. Integrated Systems,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Sept. 25–28, 1989, paper D3.
[95] A. R. Vellekoop and M. K. Smit, “Four-channel integrated-optic wavelength demultiplexer with weak polarization dependence,” J. Lightwave
Technol., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 310–314, Mar. 1991.
[96] B. H. Verbeek, A. A. M. Staring, E. J. Jansen, R. van Roijen, J. J.
M. Binsma, T. van Dongen, M. R. Amersfoort, C. van Dam en, and
M. K. Smit, “Large bandwidth polarization independent and compact 8
channel PHASAR demultiplexer/filter,” Optical Fiber Communication
(OFC’94), Tech. Dig. Ser., San Jose, CA, Feb. 20–25, 1994, pp. 63–66,
postdeadline papers.
[97] B. Verbeek and M. K. Smit, “Phased array based WDM devices,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. on Optical Communication (ECOC’95), Brussels,
Belgium, Sept. 17–21, 1995, pp. 195–202.
[98] C. G. M. Vreeburg, C. R. de Boer, Y. S. Oei, B. H. Verbeek, R. T. H.
Rongen, H. Vonk, M. R. Leys, and J. H. Wolter, “Strained InP/InGaAs
quantum well layers for wavelength demultiplexers,” in Procs. 7th Eur.
Conf. Integrated Optics (ECIO‘95), Delft, The Netherlands, Apr. 3–6,
1995, pp. 283–286.
[99] C. G. M. Vreeburg, T. Uitterdijk, Y. S. Oei, M. K. Smit, F. H. Groen,
J. J. G. M. van der Tol, P. Demeester, and H. J. Frankena, “Compact
integrated InP-based add-drop multiplexer,” in Proc. 22nd Eur. Conf.
Optical Communication (ECOC’96), Oslo, Sweden, Sept. 15–19, 1996,
pp. 5.67–5.70.
[100] I. H. White, K. O. Nyairo, P. A. Kirkby, and C. J. Armistead,
2 multichannel grating cavity laser for
“Demonstration of a 1
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) applications,” Electron. Lett.,
vol. 26, no. 13, pp. 832–834, June 1990.
[101] H. Yamada, K. Takada, Y. Inoue, Y. Hibino, and M. Hroiguchi, “10
GHz-spaced arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer with phase-errorcompensating thin-film heaters,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 5, pp.
360–361, Mar. 1995.

N 2N

2

250

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 2, NO. 2, JUNE 1996

[102] H. Yamada, K. Takada, Y. Inoue, Y. Ohmori, and S. Mitachi, “Staticallyphase-compensated 10 GHz spaced arrayed-waveguide grating,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 17, pp. 1580–1582, Aug. 1996.
[103] M. G. Young, U. Koren, B. I. Miller, M. Chien, T. L. Koch, D. M.
Tennant, K. Feder, K. Dreyer, and G. Raybon, “Six wavelength laser
array with integrated amplifier and modulator,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31,
no. 21, pp. 1835–1836, Oct. 1995.
[104] C. E. Zah, F. J. Favire, B. Pathak, R. Bhat, C. Caneau, P. S. D. Lin, A.
S. Gozdz, N. C. Andreakakis, M. A. Koza, and T. P. Lee, “Monolithic
integration of multiwavelength compressive-strained multiquantum-well
distributed-feedback laser array with star coupler and optical amplifiers,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 28, no. 25, pp. 2361–2362, Dec. 1992.
[105] F. Zamkotsian, H. Okamoto, K. Kishi, M. Okamoto, Y. Yoshikuni, K.
Sato, and K. Oe, “An InP-based optical multiplexer for 100-GHz pulsetrain generation,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 502–504, May
1995.
[106] M. Zirngibl, C. Dragone, and C. H. Joyner, “Demonstration of a 15
15 arrayed waveguide multiplexer on InP,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett.,
vol. 4, pp. 1250–1253, Nov. 1992.
[107] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, L. W. Stulz Th. Gaiffe, and C. Dragone,
“Polarization independent 8 8 waveguide grating multiplexer on InP,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 201–202, Jan. 1993.
[108] M. Zirngibl and C. H. Joyner, “12 frequency WDM laser based on a
transmissive waveguide grating router,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, no. 9,
pp. 701–702, Apr. 1994.
[109] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and B. Glance, “Digitally tunable channel
dropping filter/ equalizer based on waveguide grating router and optical
amplifier integration,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 513–515,
Apr. 1994.
[110] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, L. W. Stulz, U. Koren, M.-D. Chien, M. G.
Young, and B. I. Miller, “Digitally tunable laser based on a waveguide
grating multiplexer and an optical amplifier,” IEEE Photon. Technol.
Lett., vol. 6, pp. 516–518, Apr. 1994.
[111] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and L. W. Stulz, “Demonstration of 9 200
Mbit/s wavelength division multiplexed transmitter,” Electron. Lett., vol.
30, no. 18, pp. 1484–1485, Sept. 1994.

[112] M. Zirngibl, B. Glance, L. W. Stulz, C. H. Joyner, G. Raybon, and I.
P. Kaminow, “Characterization of a multiwavelength waveguide grating
router laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 1082–1084, Sept.
1994.
[113] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and L. W. Stulz, “WDM receiver by
monolithic integration of an optical preamplifier, waveguide grating
router and photodiode array,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 581–582,
Mar. 1995.
[114] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and P. C. Chou, “Polarization compensated
waveguide grating router on InP,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 19, pp.
1662–1664, Sept. 1995.
[115] M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, C. R. Doerr, L. W. Stulz, and H. M. Presby,
“A 18 channel multi frequency laser,” Integrated Photonics Research
1996, Boston, MA, Apr. 29–May 2, 1996, pp. 128–131.

2
Meint K. Smit, for photograph and biography, see this issue, p. 150.

2

2

Cor van Dam was born in the Hague, The Netherlands, in 1967. He received the master’s degree in
electrical engineering from the Delft University of
Technology, in 1990.
His thesis research was carried out in the Integrated Optics group of the Laboratory of Telecommunication and Remote Sensing Technology and
concerned the development of an CAD-tool for the
design and analysis of photonic integrated circuits,
using a microwave design system. In 1991, he
was appointed to the scientific staff of the laboratory where he is currently carrying out his Ph.D. research which involves
development of polarization independent integrated wavelength division demultiplexers.

