Arrayed waveguide gratings
Citation for published version (APA):
Leijtens, X. J. M., Kuhlow, B., & Smit, M. K. (2006). Arrayed waveguide gratings. In H. Venghaus (Ed.),
Wavelength filters in fiber optics (pp. 125-187). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-31770-8_5

DOI:
10.1007/3-540-31770-8_5
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/2006
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.

Download date: 18. Jun. 2026

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings
Xaveer J. M. Leijtens, Berndt Kuhlow and Meint K. Smit

4.1 Introduction
Arrayed Waveguide Grating (AWG) multiplexers/demultiplexers are planar devices which are based on an array of waveguides with both imaging
and dispersive properties. They image the field in an input waveguide onto
an array of output waveguides in such a way that the different wavelength
signals present in the input waveguide are imaged onto different output
waveguides. AWGs were first reported by Smit [1] (1988) and later by
Takahashi [2] (1990) and Dragone [3] (1991). They are known under different names: Phased Arrays (PHASARs), Arrayed Waveguide Gratings
(AWGs), and Waveguide Grating Routers (WGRs). The acronym AWG,
introduced by Takahashi [2], is the most frequently used name today and
will also be used in this text. Together with Thin-Film Filters and Fibre
Bragg Gratings, AWGs are the most important filter type applied in WDM
networks, and with the advance of Photonic Integrated Circuits technology
they are expected to become the most important one. Their operation principles will be described in Sect. 4.2.
The most important technologies used for realisation of AWGs today
are silica-on-silicon technology and Indiumphosphide (InP)-based semiconductor technology. In addition, research on silicon-based polymer technology [4, 5] and on lithium niobate [6] have been reported as well.
Silica-on-silicon (SoS) AWGs have been introduced to the market in
1994 and currently hold the largest share of the AWG market. Their modal
field matches well with that of a fibre, and therefore it is relatively easy to
couple them to fibres. They combine low propagation loss (< 0.05 dB/cm)
with a high fibre-coupling efficiency (losses in the order of 0.1 dB).
A disadvantage is that they are relatively large due to their fibre matched
waveguide properties, which prohibit the use of short bends. This is presently being improved by using higher index contrast and spot-size converters to keep fibre coupling losses low. SoS-based AWGs will be described
in detail in Sect. 4.3.

126

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

AWGs can be utilized to accomplish complex functionalities in fibre optic WDM networks. They are also increasingly used in other areas such as
signal processing, measurement, and characterisation or sensing as well.
Integration of AWGs enables compact, high functionality devices. Examples from the area of fibre optic communication will be presented in
Sect. 4.4.
Semiconductor-based devices have the potential to integrate a wide variety of functions on a single chip; they are suitable for integration of passive devices such as AWGs with active ones such as electro-optical
switches, modulators, and optical amplifiers, and also non-linear devices
such as wavelength converters. The dominant technology for operation in
the telecom window is based on InP. InP-based AWGs can be very compact due to the large index-contrast of InP-based waveguides. The market
for integrated components is still small, but it is expected to become increasingly important in the coming years. InP-based technology will be
described in Sect. 4.5, a brief description of other material systems is given
in Sect. 4.6, and finally, characterisation of AWGs is discussed in
Sect. 4.7.

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics
4.2.1 Principle
Figure 4.1 shows the schematic layout of an AWG-demultiplexer, and the
operation can be understood as follows [7]. When a beam propagating
through the transmitter waveguide enters the first Free Propagation Region
(FPR) it is no longer laterally confined and becomes divergent. On arriving
at the input aperture the beam is coupled into the waveguide array and
propagates through the individual waveguides towards the output aperture.
The length of the array waveguides is chosen such that the optical path
length difference between adjacent waveguides equals an integer multiple
of the central wavelength O c of the demultiplexer. For O c , the fields in the
individual waveguides arrive at the output aperture with equal phase (mod.
2S), and thus the field distribution at the input aperture is reproduced at the
output aperture. The divergent beam at the input aperture is thus transformed into a convergent one with equal amplitude and phase distribution,
and the input field at the object plane gives rise to a corresponding image
at the centre of the image plane. The spatial separation of different wavelengths is obtained by linearly increasing the lengths of the array waveguides, which introduces a wavelength-dependent tilt of the outgoing beam

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics

127

Fig. 4.1. (a) Geometry of an AWG demultiplexer, (b) beam focusing geometry in the
free propagation region

associated with a shift of the focal point along the image plane. If receiver
waveguides are placed at proper positions along the image plane, different
wavelengths are led to different output ports.
4.2.2 Focusing, Spatial Dispersion, and Free Spectral Range
Focusing of the fields propagating in an AWG is obtained if the length
difference 'L between adjacent waveguides is equal to an integer number
m of wavelengths inside the AWG:

'L

m

Oc
neff

(4.1)

128

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

The integer m is called the order of the array, O c is the central wavelength (in vacuo) of the AWG, neff is the effective refractive (phase) index
of the guided mode, and O c / neff corresponds to the wavelength inside the
array waveguides. Under these circumstances the array behaves like a lens
with image and object planes at a distance Ra of the array apertures.
On the other hand, the focal line (which defines the image plain) follows
a circle with radius Ra / 2 , and transmitter and receiver waveguides should
be located on this line. This geometry is equivalent to a Rowland-type
mounting.
The length increment 'L of the array gives rise to a phase difference according to

'I E'L

(4.2)

where

2SQneff / c

E

(4.3)

is the propagation constant in the waveguides, Q = c/O is the frequency of
the propagating wave, and c is the speed of light in vacuo. The wavelength-dependent phase difference 'I introduces the wavelength-dependent tilt of the outgoing wave front associated with a wavelength-dependent shift of the corresponding image (as already mentioned above).
The lateral displacement ds of the focal spot along the image plane per unit
frequency change dQ is called the spatial dispersion Dsp of the AWG,
which is given by (for details see [8]):

ds
dQ

Dsp

1 ng 'L

Q c nFPR 'D

(4.4)

where nFPR is the (slab) mode index in the Free Propagation Region, 'D is
the divergence angle between the array waveguides in the fan-in and the
fan-out sections, and ng is the group index of the waveguide mode:

ng

neff  Q

dneff
dQ

(4.5)

According to (4.1) and (4.4) the (spatial) dispersion is fully determined
by the order m and the divergence angle 'D, and as a consequence fillingin of the space between the array waveguides near the apertures due to
finite lithographical resolution (cf. Sects. 4.3 and 4.4) does not affect the
dispersive properties of the AWG.
If the input wavelength change is such that the phase difference 'I between adjacent waveguides (4.2) has increased by 2S, the transfer will be

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics

129

the same as before, i. e. the response of the AWG is periodic. The period in
the frequency domain is called the Free Spectral Range (FSR), and
'E'L S in combination with (4.1) leads to:

FSR

Q c §¨ neff ·¸
m ¨© n g ¸¹

(4.6)

In order to avoid crosstalk problems with adjacent orders, the free spectral range should be larger than the whole frequency range spanned by all
channels, and thus for a demultiplexer with 8 channels and 200 GHz channel spacing for example, the FSR should be at least 1600 GHz. If the channels are centred around 1550 nm, (4.6) yields that this requires an array
with an order of about 120 (with neff / ng | 0.975 for the SoS- and neff / ng | 0.9
for the InP-material system).
If the device is to be used in combination with Erbium-Doped Fibre
Amplifiers (EDFAs), the FSR should be chosen such that adjacent orders
do not coincide with the peak of the EDFA gain spectrum in order to avoid
accumulation of Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE).
4.2.3 Insertion Loss and Non-uniformity
Fields propagating through an AWG are attenuated due to various loss
mechanisms. The most important contribution to this loss is coming from
the junctions between the free propagation regions and the waveguide array. For low-loss the fan-in and fan-out sections should operate adiabatically, i. e. there should be a smooth transition from the guided propagation
in the array to the free-space propagation in the FPRs and vice versa. This
will occur if the divergence angle 'D between the array waveguides is
sufficiently small and the vertex between the waveguides is sufficiently
sharp. Due to the finite resolution of the lithographical process blunting of
the vertex will occur. Junction losses for practical devices are between
1 and 2 dB per junction (i. e. between 2–4 dB for the total device). Propagation loss in the AWG and coupling losses due to a mismatch between the
imaged field and the receiver waveguide mode (see below) are usually
much smaller.
If the transmission for the central channel of the AWG is Tc, then the attenuation of the central channel is given by

A0

10 log Tc

(4.7)

From Fig. 4.2a it is seen that the outer channels have more loss than the
central ones. This reduction is caused by the fact that the far field of the

130

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.2. (Left) The field in the image plane for different wavelengths, showing the
influence of the far-field pattern of the individual array waveguide and the occurrence
of different orders (Right) the corresponding frequency response curve for the different
channels

individual array waveguides drops in directions different from the main
optical axis. The envelope, as indicated in the figure, is mainly determined
by the far field radiation pattern of the individual array waveguides. The
non-uniformity 'TAWG is defined as the difference in transmission between the central channel(s) and the outermost channels (nrs. 1 and N):

'TAWG

T
10 log 1, N
Tc

(4.8)

in which Tc is the transmission of the central channel(s).
The power which is lost from the main lobe will appear in adjacent orders, as shown in the left part of Fig. 4.2. If the free spectral range is chosen N times the channel spacing, then the outer channels of the AWG will
experience almost 3 dB more loss than the central channels, i. e. the nonuniformity is close to 3 dB. This is because at a deflection angle at half the
angular distance between the orders of the array the power in the image is
reduced by 50% because at that angle it will be equally divided over the
two orders at both sides of the optical axis. In a periodical AWG the outer
channels will be close to these 3–dB points.
From the above it is clear that the non-uniformity of an AWG can be
reduced by increasing the FSR, however, at the expense of a larger devicesize.

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics

131

4.2.4 Bandwidth
As explained in the introduction, AWGs are lens-like imaging devices;
they form an image of the field in the object plane at the image plane. Because of the linear length increment of the array waveguides the lens exhibits dispersion: if the wavelength changes, the image moves along the
image plane without changing shape, in principle. Most of the AWG properties can be understood by considering the coupling behaviour of the focal
field in the image plane to the receiver waveguide(s). This coupling is described by the overlap integral of the normalised receiver waveguide mode
Ur (s) and the normalised focal field Uf (s) in the image plane, as illustrated
in Fig. 4.3:

K ('s)

³ U (s  's) U ( s) ds
f

r

2

(4.9)

in which 's is the displacement of the focal field relative to the receiver
waveguide centre. If Ur (s) and the image field Uf (s) have the same shape,
which will be the case if identical waveguides are used for the transmitter
and receiver waveguides, then the coupling efficiency Ș can be close to
100% on proper design of the AWG. The power transfer function Ti (Q )
for the i-th receiver waveguide is found by substituting

's

Dsp  (Q  Q i )

(4.10)

T c  K{Dsp  (Q  Q i )}

(4.11)

in (4.9), which yields

Ti (Q )

Fig. 4.3. The receiver waveguide mode profile Ur (s) and the focal field Uf (s)

132

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

where Qi is the frequency corresponding to the i-th channel. The power
transmission of the (virtual) central channel Tc is normally smaller than 1
due to the transmission losses in the AWG, and it is also worthwhile to
note that for an even number of channels there will be no receiver waveguide at the centre of the image plane. Figure 4.2 shows an example of
a demultiplexer response curve for different channels, in which the most
important characteristics of the device are indicated.
To analyse the transmission loss at the input and output aperture of the
array, which form the main contributions to the total insertion loss for the
central channels of the device, the most usual approach is to overlap (4.9)
the far field of the transmitter with the sum field of the individual array
waveguides, with excitation coefficients proportional to the incident field
strength. This analysis ignores the coupling between the waveguides,
which will reduce the transition losses at the input and output aperture of
the arrays. A more rigorous analysis of the array imaging properties is
presented in [9].
4.2.5 Passband Shape
An important feature of the AWG-filter characteristics is the passband
shape. Without special measures the channel response has a more or less
Gaussian shape. This is because the mode profiles of the transmitter and
receiver waveguides of the AWG can be described to a good approximation by a Gaussian function, so that their overlap (4.9) is also Gaussian.
The 1–dB bandwidth is usually 25–30% of the channel spacing.
The Gaussian shape of the channel response imposes tight restrictions on
the wavelength tolerance of the emitters (e. g. laser diodes) and requires
accurate temperature control for both the AWGs and the laser diodes.
Moreover, when signals are transmitted through several filters in a WDM
network, the cumulative passband width for each channel narrows significantly. Therefore, flattened and broadened channel transmissions are an
important requirement for AWG de/multiplexers. Different approaches to
flatten the passbands of AWGs have been published. The simplest method
is to use multimode waveguides at the receiver side of an AWG. If the focal
spot moves at the AWG output along a broad waveguide, almost 100% of
the light is coupled into the receiver to have a flat region of transmission
[10]. However, this approach is unfavourable for single-mode systems.
Other methods convert the field at the transmitter or receiver into a double image as indicated in Fig. 4.4a. The wavelength response, which follows
from the overlap of this field with the normal mode of a receiver/transmitter
waveguide, will get a flat region as shown in Fig. 4.4b. The double image is

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics

(a)

133

(b)

Fig. 4.4. Wavelength response flattening: (a) Shape of the focal field Uf required for
obtaining a flat region in the overlap with the receiver mode Ur, (b) wavelength response obtained by applying a camel-shaped focal field (the dashed curve indicates the
non-flattened response obtained by applying a non-modified focal field, i. e. Uf = Ur

created by use of a short MMI coupler [11], a Y-junction [12] or a nonadiabatic parabolic horn [13], where the best results are achieved with the
parabolic horn. Other approaches based on spatial filtering use waveguide
arm length changes inside the AWG that excite a sinc-like field distribution
at the grating exit, which produces, via Fourier transform, a rectangular
transmission shape [14, 15]. The use of interleaved gratings [16] or phasedithering [17] for this purpose have also been published.
All these techniques fundamentally increase the insertion loss (on the
order of 3 dB) because only a portion of the image is focused onto each
waveguide output. This can be avoided by combining the AWG with
a synchronized AWG or MZI-duplexer at the input, as is demonstrated, for
example, in [18, 19]. A discussion of different techniques for passband
flattening with a list of references is given in [15].
4.2.6 Crosstalk
One of the most important characteristics of the device is the inter-channel
crosstalk. It is the contribution of unwanted signals, e. g. in the case of adjacent channels, the contribution of the (unwanted) signal at frequency Qi+1 to
the (detected) channel i. The theoretical adjacent-channel crosstalk Ax follows from the overlap of the focal field with the unwanted mode (4.9) as

Ax

K (d )

(4.12)

with d being the distance between adjacent receiver waveguides. From this
formula it is seen that arbitrary large crosstalk attenuation is possible by
positioning the receiver waveguides sufficiently far apart. Usually a gap of

134

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

1–2 times the waveguide width is sufficient for more than 40 dB adjacent
inter-channel crosstalk attenuation. However, in practice other mechanisms
appear to limit the crosstalk attenuation. The most important ones are errors in the phase transfer of the array waveguides. They are due to nonuniformities in layer thickness, waveguide width, and refractive index and
cause a rather noisy “crosstalk floor”, which is better than 35 dB for good
devices. Semiconductor-based devices exhibit slightly inferior crosstalk
figures compared to silica-based ones.
Crosstalk figures provided for experimental and commercial devices
usually refer to single-channel crosstalk levels, i. e. the crosstalk resulting
from a single channel. In an operational environment crosstalk contributions from all active channels will impair the crosstalk level compared to
the single-channel crosstalk attenuation. This effect is discussed in [20]
(Note: One should keep in mind that crosstalk is defined in such a way (cf.
Glossary) that device behaviour is the better the higher the crosstalk which
is somewhat counter-intuitive).
4.2.7 Wavelength Routing Properties
An interesting device is obtained if the AWG is designed with N input and
N output waveguides and a free spectral range equalling N times the channel spacing. With such an arrangement the device behaves cyclical: a signal disappearing from output N will reappear at output 1, if the frequency
is increased by an amount equal to the channel spacing. Such a device is
called a cyclical wavelength router [3]. It provides an important additional
functionality compared to multiplexers and demultiplexers and plays a key
role in more complex devices as add-drop multiplexers and wavelength
switches. Figure 4.5 illustrates its functionality. Each of the N input ports
can carry N different frequencies. The N frequencies carried by input
channel 1 (signals a1–a4 in Fig. 4.5) are distributed among output channels
wavelength
router
a1, a2, a3, a4

a4, b3, c2 , d1

b1, b2, b3, b4

a3, b2, c1 , d4

c 1 , c 2 , c3 , c4

a2, b1, c4 , d3

d1, d2, d3, d4

a1, b4, c3 , d2

Fig. 4.5. Schematic diagram illustrating the operation of a wavelength router

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics

135

1 to N in such a way that output channel 1 carries frequency N (signal a4)
and channel N frequency 1 (signal a1). The N frequencies carried by input
2 (signals b1–b4) are distributed in the same way, but cyclically shifted by
1 channel in such a way that frequencies 1–3 are coupled to ports 3–1 and
frequency 4 to port 4. In this way each output channel receives N different
frequencies, one from each input channel. To realise such an interconnectivity scheme in a strictly non-blocking way using a single frequency,
a large number of switches would be required. With a wavelength router,
this functionality can be achieved using only a single component. Wavelength routers are key components also in multi-wavelength add-drop multiplexers and crossconnects (see below).
4.2.8 Configuration-dependent Crosstalk in Add-drop
Multiplexers
One key application of AWGs is adding or dropping wavelengths from
a multiplex. AWGs in different configurations can be used for this purpose,
and the corresponding interchannel crosstalk is a parameter of particular
importance. One standard configuration consists of two symmetrically connected 1 u N AWGs with identical wavelength response (Fig. 4.6a). This
architecture exhibits an almost perfect isolation between the add and the
drop port, and spurious intensity of the dropped signal propagating towards
the output is suppressed again by the multiplexer, so that the total crosstalk
attenuation is essentially doubled. The latter is not the case for cheaper
configuration illustrated in Fig. 4.6b which uses a power combiner instead
of a multiplexing AWG.
An add-drop multiplexer as shown in Fig. 4.6a can be made configurable, i. e. the added and dropped wavelengths can be selected with an external control signal by combining the (de)multiplexers with switches as

Fig. 4.6. Add-drop multiplexers with fixed add-drop channel. DMX: demultiplexer,
MUX: multiplexer

136

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.7. Two reconfigurable add-drop multiplexers, based on one 2x2 switch (a) and
two 1x2 switches (b) per channel. DMX: demultiplexer, MUX: multiplexer

shown in Fig. 4.7. In the configuration of Fig. 4.7a the add-signal may end
up in the drop-port at an undesirably high level through-crosstalk in the
switch. In the configuration of Fig. 4.7b, which requires two 1 u 2 switches
per channel instead of one 2 u 2, the isolation is almost perfect.
A disadvantage of the configurations shown in Fig. 4.6 and Fig. 4.7 is
that for low insertion loss operation they require two (de)multiplexers. Figure 4.8 shows an add-drop multiplexer realised with a single (N + 1) u
(N + 1) AWG. In the first pass through the AWG the four wavelengths are
demultiplexed. They are fed to four different switches with which they can
wavelength router
in

drop
out
MUX

wavelength router
in

X
X

X

out

X

X

X

X

X

(a)

MUX

DMX

drop

add

DMX

(b)

add

Fig. 4.8. Two add-drop multiplexer configurations based on a single wavelength router
in a loop-back configuration (a) and in a fold-back configuration (b). MUX: multiplexer, DMX: demultiplexer

4.2 Operation Principle and Device Characteristics

137

be switched to the drop port or be looped back to the wavelength router
which multiplexes them to the output port. In the drop state a signal applied
to the add port will be multiplexed to the output port. A disadvantage of this
loop-back configuration is that crosstalk of the AWG is coupled directly
into the main output port, where it competes with the transmitted signal,
which is attenuated in the loop. This problem can be reduced by applying
the AWG in a fold-back configuration as shown in Fig. 4.8b, which requires
a larger AWG, however. One advantage of configurations using one AWG
only is that the channel wavelengths automatically fit. A comparison of
crosstalk properties of different configurations is given in [21].
4.2.9 Polarisation Dependence
If the propagation constants for the fundamental TE- and TM-modes
(electrical field vector parallel and perpendicular to the wafer plane, respectively), of the array waveguides are equal, the AWG exhibits polarisation independence, i. e. identical spectral response for any polarisation.
On the other hand, any waveguide birefringence, i. e. any difference in
propagation constants for TE- and TM-polarised modes, results in a shift
'Qpol of the spectral response for TE- or TM-polarised modes, which is
called polarisation dispersion. For semiconductor-based double-heterostructure waveguides, typical polarisation dispersion values are in the order of a few hundred GHz. In fibre-matched silica-on-silicon waveguide
structures the birefringence should be zero, in principle. However, due to
mechanical stress resulting from differences in thermal expansion coefficients of waveguide layers and substrate, polarisation dispersion of more
than 20 GHz may still occur, which is too much for dense WDM systems
applications.
Different concepts have been developed for reducing (residual) polarisation dependence. An elegant method applied in silica-based devices is the
insertion of a O-plate in the middle of the phased array [22]. Light entering the array in TE-polarised state will be converted by the O-plate and
travel through the second half of the array in TM-polarised state, and TMpolarised light will similarly traverse half the array in TE-state. As a consequence, TE- and TM-polarised input signals will experience the same
phase change regardless of the birefringence properties of the waveguides.
These and other approaches will be discussed in more detail in Sect. 4.3.
In semiconductor waveguides the birefringence is usually much larger
due to the large refractive index contrast of these waveguides. The most
straightforward approach for polarisation independence is by making the
waveguide cross section square when the index contrast is the same in the

138

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

vertical and lateral direction, as is the case, for example, in buried waveguide structures. In waveguides with a different lateral and vertical contrast, polarisation independence may be achieved by choosing a proper
ratio between the height and the width of the waveguide. However, the
restriction to waveguides supporting the propagation of a single mode
only (monomode waveguides) in combination with typical material composition and index contrast leads to very small waveguide dimensions and
tight tolerance requirements, which are extremely demanding to fabricate.
Rather small deviations of layer thicknesses, composition, or waveguide
width introduce a polarisation dependence again. Relaxed tolerances are
obtained if low-contrast waveguides with a relatively large waveguide
core are used, which is also advantageous for achieving low fibre coupling loss.
4.2.10 Temperature Dependence
Temperature independence is an important issue for passive devices that
should operate in the field under varying temperature conditions. It is also
important in integrated chips where chip temperatures may be dependent
on bias currents of optical amplifiers. The main effect of temperature
change in a temperature-dependent AWG is a shift of the wavelength response. In active devices temperature dependence is less important because power supply for active temperature control is available, although
this raises the component cost.
InP-based AWGs have a temperature dependence in the order of
0.12 nm/°C, so they can be tuned over a wavelength range of a few nanometres with a temperature change of 30–40°C.
SoS-AWGs have a temperature dependence which is smaller by one order of magnitude, still too large for uncooled operation, but too small for
active tuning.
A popular way to achieve temperature insensitivity is by insertion of triangular regions with material with a different temperature sensitivity in the
free propagation region of the AWG in a similar way as applied for polarisation insensitivity [23]. Other methods have been reported too and are
discussed in Sect. 4.3.3.
An important feature of temperature-insensitive devices is the accuracy
with which their channel wavelength is controlled: if it deviates from the
target value, one can no longer use temperature tuning to trim it to the right
value. So temperature insensitive AWGs require a high degree of process
control or the possibility to trim the devices, which is costly.

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices

139

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices
4.3.1 Silica-on-Silicon PLC Fabrication Techniques
As discussed in the introduction, AWGs are one of the most important
filter types applied in WDM networks, and silica-on-silicon devices are the
variety predominating in current optical networks.
The fabrication of SoS-AWGs relies essentially on the combination of
techniques developed independently in two different fields: the well established deposition techniques for silica-based glasses and optical fibres plus
etching and structuring developed for VLSI micro-fabrication [24].
AWGs are a special type of Planar Lightwave Circuit (PLC), and these
are fabricated on planar substrates, typically a crystalline flat silicon wafer.
Alternatively, optically flat fused silica substrates are also used, which
results in reduced polarisation-dependence of the waveguide characteristics and enables the fusing of optical fibres to the waveguides [25].
Favourable properties of silicon wafers are their high degree of planarity, excellent heat dissipation property, and the potential for hybridisation
of optical and electronic components onto a common substrate. The use of
large size wafers, typically 6" or 8" in diameter, is cost effective as it enables multiple devices to be fabricated simultaneously on one wafer. Silicon wafers are normally pre-oxidized resulting in an oxide layer of typically several µm thickness. This layer facilitates the adhesion of deposited
silica and forms at the same time part of a buffer layer.
Usually, the fabrication of silica PLCs starts with the deposition of a stack
of glass layers of high silica content onto the wafer, where the glass composition is similar to that of an optical fibre. Their simple waveguide core structure, low propagation loss, and an almost perfect field match to optical fibres
are the key factors which have given silica PLCs their predominance.
For the deposition of silica waveguide layers various processes have been
explored, and two of them have gained major importance: flame hydrolysis,
a method originally developed for fibre pre-form fabrication, and chemical
vapour deposition (CVD), a common process in micro-fabrication.
The PLC base layer is usually made of undoped SiO2, while the other
glass layers are made of doped silica and are flowed during annealing,
a process that helps to form homogeneous low loss material. Typical
dopants for the silica core layer are Ge, P, or Ti, which slightly raise the
refractive index of the core with respect to buffer and cladding. In order to
enable filling-in between closely spaced core sections the upper cladding
must exhibit easy flow characteristics, while the core and buffer layer have
to remain rigid. Furthermore, the refractive index of the cladding layer
should closely match that of the buffer layer. For this purpose dopants such

140

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

as B and P are added simultaneously to the cladding layer. While the addition of B lowers both, the flow temperature and the refractive index,
P raises the refractive index and thus enables index compensation. As an
alternative F has also been used to reduce the refractive index [26].
The standard fabrication of silica PLCs uses optical lithography, and
this relies on a chromium mask on a quartz blank which carries the waveguide structure. The mask is designed by CAD and subsequently written
by electron-beam lithography with sub-µm accuracy. The pixel size during
mask writing has a strong influence on the AWG’s performance [27].
Waveguide cross sections are quadratic in most cases, however, their
width is sometimes enlarged in waveguide bends.
Waveguide forming starts by deposition of the etching mask layer on top
of the core layer, and the mask structure is then transferred into the silica core
layer by reactive ion etching (RIE) or similar techniques. It is of key importance that the etching process provides waveguides with sufficiently smooth
side-walls since the side-wall roughness induces scattering losses which
should be kept as low as possible. In order to get embedded waveguides it is
necessary to deposit a cladding layer with a refractive index similar to that of
the buffer layer in a final processing step after mask removal.

Flame Hydrolysis
Flame hydrolysis (FHD) for silica PLCs has mainly been developed by
Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (NTT) in Japan [24]. Fine
glass particles produced in an O2/H2 torch fed by a mixture of vapours such
as SiCl4 and GeCl4 or TiCl4 (in the case of the core) are deposited onto the
substrate, while the torch is traversed repeatedly over the moving substrate
held at lower temperature. The refractive index of the core layer is determined by the relative content of Ge or Ti, while the base layer is usually
made of undoped silica. The porous glass layers produced by FHD are consolidated by annealing due to heating up to around 1200°C to 1300°C.
Small amounts of BCl3 and PCl3 are added to the gas mixture to build the
upper cladding layer which is consolidated at a somewhat lower temperature. In the case of PLCs on silicon substrates, a 10 to 15 µm thick SiO2
buffer layer is normally used in order to avoid leakage from the silica waveguide core to the silicon substrate which has a much higher refractive index.
The thickness of the doped core layer is normally determined by the requirement of single mode propagation for a quadratic core cross section.
Differences ǻn of the effective refractive index of the core and that of the
buffer can be adjusted from about 0.25% to 1.5–2.0%. In the case of
ǻn = 0.75% silica, which is commonly used in 1.55 µm wavelength PLCs,
the core layer is 6 µm thick.

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices

141

Chemical Vapour Deposition
Chemical vapour deposition (CVD) and related processes such as low pressure chemical vapour deposition (LPCVD) [28] and plasma-enhanced
chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) are also often used for silica PLC
fabrication [29]. These methods enable the deposition of thin layers of undoped or doped silica by using admixtures of either vapours or gases [30].
Phosphorous is a frequently used dopant for the core layer. In a typical
CVD process the substrate is exposed to one or more volatile precursors
which react and/or decompose on the substrate surface to produce the desired deposition. PECVD and its variants, on the other hand, rely on ionic
catalysts.
LPCVD is a method of film deposition primarily used in silicon technology which has also been adapted to silica device fabrication [31].
LPCVD works at sub-atmospheric pressure which tends to reduce unwanted gas phase reactions and improves film uniformity across the wafer.
Several manufacturers use this deposition method with great success, and
sometimes a combination of both, FHD and CVD, is also used. Although
deposition rates of ~1 µm/h are rather low, the total wafer throughput is
normally high enough because 50 or even more wafers can be processed
simultaneously in a CVD reactor. Deposition temperatures range from 400
to 800°C, depending on the reactants. Annealing is carried out at temperatures of ~900–1100°C. In a CVD process layer growth takes place on both
sides of the wafer which minimizes wafer bowing.
One advantage of PECVD, compared to both FHD and CVD, is that it is
a low-temperature process, compatible with temperatures occurring in
microelectronics processing. However, this potential advantage is lost if
high-temperature annealing is needed for smoothing out irregularities,
which might have been introduced during the waveguide etching process.
In addition, the PECVD process offers the possibility to monitor the refractive index of the deposited layers using in-situ ellipsometry.
Other advantages of CVD processes in silica waveguide fabrication are
both lower stress (reduced birefringence) in waveguide layers and higher
layer uniformity over large wafer areas, and these features can be of high
relevance for large channel count, high resolution AWGs designed for
DWDM applications.
4.3.2 Birefringence
Glass layers of silica-on-silicon wafers tend to exhibit compressive stress
after they have been cooled down to room temperature as a consequence of
different thermal expansion coefficients of glass and silicon, and this effect

142

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

is particularly pronounced if the layer deposition has been made by FHD.
The stress induces birefringence (cf. Sect. 4.2.9), and as a consequence
standard silica-based AWGs exhibit polarisation-dependent optical properties. The corresponding wavelength separation ǻȜ between the peak transmission for TE- and TM-polarisation is given by
ǻȜ = 1/m · ǻL · (nTE  nTM),

(4.13)

where m is the waveguide grating order, ǻL is the path difference between
neighbouring arrayed waveguides, and nTE and nTM are the effective refractive indices for TE- and TM-polarised guided waves, respectively.
A typical value for silica-on-silicon at 1.55 µm wavelength is
(nTE  nTM) = 2.4·10–4.
For the case of an AWG with 100 GHz channel spacing such a refractive
index difference induces a TE-TM shift of ǻȜ = 0.26 nm (33 GHz), which
is not acceptable in many cases, in particular for DWDM applications [32].
Several methods have been reported which compensate this polarisation
dependence, and these include TE/TM mode conversion [33], dopant-rich
cladding [32, 34, 35] and undercladding [36], groove-assisted waveguides
[37], width-controlled waveguides [38], and core-over-etching methods [39].
In the case of TE/TM mode conversion (cf. Sect. 4.2.9), a thin half-wave
plate (being a 14.5 µm thick stretched polyimide foil) is inserted into a slit
in the centre of the arrayed waveguide grating and fixed with UV-curable
adhesive [33]. In the case of a conventional AWG a typical excess loss of
0.4 dB is introduced by this method. Using dopant-rich cladding a TE-TM
shift ǻȜ < 0.02 nm (2.5 GHz) was obtained without significant excess loss.
This corresponds to a reduced birefringence of (nTE  nTM) < 1.8·10–5 [32].
4.3.3 Silica Waveguide Features and their Influence on AWGs
Three waveguide parameters are particularly essential for PLC-based
AWGs and are relevant for the AWG design. These parameters are:
1. the waveguide loss (over the wavelength range of interest),
2. the waveguide coupling characteristics to other components of a network, e. g. fibres,
3. the lowest possible bend radius which still assures acceptable radiation
loss.
ad 1: As known from optical fibres, silica itself has extremely low optical
loss in the wavelength range throughout the visible and near infrared
region which covers all wavelengths utilized in optical communication.

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices

143

However, the preferred spectral transmission region is between about 1.3
to 1.6 µm. This is essentially due to the fact that Rayleigh scattering losses
strongly increase towards shorter wavelengths, and the same is true for
planar silica waveguides as a consequence of inevitable residual sidewall
roughness induced by technological processes such as lithography and
etching. The associated losses are approximately 103 times higher than
those of a fibre. Furthermore, the effect is more pronounced with waveguides of higher index contrast, provided the roughness is comparable.
ad 2: For low-contrast silica devices (see below), the waveguide mode
matches with that of a standard single mode fibre (SMF), resulting in very
low coupling losses. For higher contrast waveguides, a high coupling efficiency requires mode matching, and it is necessary to integrate a taper to
the input/output waveguides of the AWG. Coupling losses well below
0.5 dB are feasible, even for high contrast waveguides, if a proper modeconverter is applied.
ad 3: The choice of a waveguide design with a given 'n value affects the
minimum possible bending radius and therefore the compactness and size
of a device. Since the typical bending radius R of a silica waveguide is
around 2–25 mm, the chip size of large-scale circuits can amount to several
cm2. Therefore, reduction of propagation loss and uniformity of refractive
indices throughout the wafer are strongly required. Increasing ǻn of
a waveguide allows for smaller waveguide bending radii and enables the
realization of high-density integrated circuits. Low-ǻn waveguides are
superior to the high-ǻn waveguides in terms of fibre coupling losses with
standard single mode fibres SMF-28. On the other hand, the much smaller
minimum bending radii of high-ǻn waveguides enable the fabrication of
highly integrated and large scale optical circuits such as AWGs with high
channel numbers and with high resolution.
Four different (standard) ǻn values are typically used for silica waveguides,
and each ǻn value corresponds to a specific core width which assures single-mode propagation. Lowest loss down to 0.017 dB/cm has been achieved
in low-ǻn waveguides with ǻn = 0.30% (core size 8 u 8 µm2, R = 25 mm)
and also with ǻn = 0.45% (core size 7 u 7 µm2, R = 15 mm) [40]. These
waveguides match best to standard SMFs, but their large bending radii lead
to rather large PLCs. Waveguides with “standard” ǻn = 0.75%-silica (core
size 6 u 6 µm2, R = 5 mm) are more practical for compact PLCs and have
still tolerable mode match to SMFs. Corresponding minimum waveguide
propagation losses of 0.035 dB/cm have been reported [41]. A propagation
loss of about 0.1 dB/cm was obtained for super-high 'n 1.5  2%-silica

144

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

(core size 4.5 u 4.5 to 3 u 3 µm2, R = 2 mm) [42], which enables high density
PLCs, but requires special tapers for coupling to SMFs.
Slightly higher losses are observed for the TM modes in comparison to
TE modes, and this is attributed to the roughness of the waveguide sidewalls caused by the RIE process (cf. above). However, this effect is usually negligible in loss considerations of AWGs.
A conventional 16-channel 100-GHz-spacing AWG fabricated with
0.75%-'n waveguides may have a size of about 26 u 21 mm2. This circuit
size increases rapidly when the channel count rises beyond 100. For example, a 200 channel AWG can be more than 100 cm2 in size, which makes
its fabrication difficult. Moving to 1.5%-'n waveguides with corresponding lower bending radius allows to fabricate such a 200 channel AWG on
a 4-inch wafer [43].
Another high-contrast low-loss “silica-like” material is Hydex™ with
pre-adjustable index contrast between 1.5% and 25%, developed by Little
Optics. Bending radii in the sub-mm range and correspondingly dense
PLCs are possible. In addition to different passive optical PLCs such as
µ-ring filters (cf. Chap. 8), star couplers, delay lines and many others,
a 40-channel AWG has also been demonstrated with more than 200 pieces
integrated on a single 6-inch wafer [44]. However, efficient coupling to the
optical fibre is not at all an easy task in that case because of strongly different optical modes of the AWG input waveguides and the optical fibre.
4.3.4 AWG Development Trends
AWGs are available as wavelength multiplexers and demultiplexers to be
used in WDM networks for more than a decade. Since then they have
steadily been improved, and this process is still going on. In the following
we will discuss current development trends, but we will start with a description of typical characteristics of state-of-the-art AWGs.
Various kinds of de/multiplexers relying on “standard” ǻn = 0.75% silica and exhibiting good performance have been demonstrated in the laboratory rather early [4547]. They range from 50 nm spacing, 8-channel
AWGs for CWDM to 25 GHz spacing, 128-channel AWGs for DWDM
applications or even AWGs with 10 GHz spacing.
Table 4.1 shows characteristic parameters of corresponding typical
AWG multiplexers with Gaussian passband fabricated in the standard silica-on-silicon technique [48]. Table 4.1 also illustrates a number of trends
and dependences as the number of channels increases and the channel
spacing gets lower simultaneously. For example, clearly to be seen is the
proper choice of grating order m yielding a FSR value, according to (4.6),

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices

145

capable to capture the full channel number N. Moreover, the spectral resolution of the AWGs is essentially determined by the product m·n, and the
number of grating arms n is typically chosen to be about three to four
times that of the number of output channels (over-sampling), which is also
illustrated in the table.
Table 4.1. Experimental performance examples of fabricated AWG multiplexers
Parameter
Number of channels N
Centre wavelength
Channel spacing 'O
('f)
Grating order m
Number of arrayed
waveguides n
On-chip loss for Oc
Channel crosstalk

Layout specifications and experimental results
8
16
32
64
128
1.30 µm
1.55 µm
1.55 µm
1.55 µm 1.55 µm
50 nm
2 nm
0.8 nm
0.4 nm
0.2 nm
(6.25 THz) (250 GHz) (100 GHz) (50 GHz) (25 GHz)
3
47
59
59
59
28
2.2 dB
> 30 dB

60
2.3 dB
> 35 dB

100
2.1 dB
> 35 dB

160
3.1 dB
> 30 dB

388
3.5 dB
> 20 dB

In general the insertion loss increases from central to peripheral output
ports by a certain amount, referred to as non-uniformity, (see (4.8)). Typical values of this variation are 2 to 3 dB, and there is an additional dependence on the FSR and on the corresponding grating order m of the AWG
under consideration. In addition, the insertion loss tends to increase
slightly with increasing channel number and device size. One option to
reduce the channel-dependent loss is choosing the number N of AWG
channels (or accordingly the FSR value) larger than the number of channels required.
The channel centre wavelengths of AWGs to be used in telecommunication systems have to be aligned exactly to the ITU grid (cf. Appendix,
Sect. A.1), and this can be assured by a Vernier design of the input waveguide geometry and temperature tuning of the AWG module [49].
In the early days the total insertion loss of AWGs was typically in the
range of 3 to 4 dB and channel crosstalk in the range of 20 to 35 dB. Both
values have been considerably improved since then by the use of special
layout, trimming methods, and advanced filtering methods.
Improving the characteristics of existing AWGs has focused on lower
insertion loss, improved crosstalk, higher channel resolution, and higher
total channel count, and corresponding work is still going on. The priority
among these parameters is essentially application- and cost dependent.

146

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

A silica-based AWG with particularly low insertion loss of only 0.75 dB
has been achieved using a structure with vertically tapered waveguides in
the intersection region between the arrayed waveguides and the slab which
reduces the transition loss at that interface. In addition, a spot-size converter was incorporated into the AWG in order to reduce the fibre-towaveguide coupling loss [50].
Another highly effective method to reduce the insertion loss of an
AWG, which is based on the same idea of tapering, has been patented by
Lucent: A segmented transition region is inserted between the slab and the
arrayed waveguides, which comprises a number of paths intersecting the
waveguide array and exhibiting progressively decreasing width as they
depart further away from the slab [51].
Besides lowering the overall insertion loss of AWGs the improvement
of crosstalk is an issue of high relevance. One source of crosstalk is phase
error. It can be compensated by trimming all waveguides in the AWG individually, but it is laborious and time consuming [52, 53]. An alternative
method is to use additional bandpass filters at the output ports of a conventional AWG. This approach has been demonstrated for a 64 channel,
50 GHz spaced silica AWG integrated with a secondary element consisting
of 64 1 u 1-channel-type AWGs (bandpass filters), each of them with
a different centre wavelength which corresponds to the centre wavelength
of the respective output of the main AWG. Silica with 'n = 0.75% was
used for the main AWG, and 'n = 1.5% silica for the AWG bandpass filters, respectively. This device exhibited an excellent crosstalk of 82 dB and
a moderate insertion loss of 3.3 dB [54].
Different AWGs with particularly high channel number and very close
channel spacing (relying on 1.5%-'n waveguides in silica) have been published by NTT. Examples are 25 GHz spacing, 256-channel AWGs with a
circuit size of about 75 u 55 mm2 and fabricated on a 4-inch wafer [55, 56]
or a 400-channel AWG with the same channel spacing that covers the full
C- and L-bands from 1530 to 1610 nm [57]. The corresponding chip size
was about 124 u 64 mm2, fabricated on a 6-inch wafer. On-chip losses
ranged from 3.8 to 6.4 dB from the central to the outer output ports, and
adjacent and far-end crosstalk were about 20 dB and better than 30 dB,
respectively.
Furthermore, demultiplexers with 10 GHz channel separation and 320
channels or even more than 1000 channels have been realized in a two-stage
architecture using auxiliary 10 GHz-spaced AWGs connected to each output
of a coarse filter AWG [58, 59]. In the latter device one 10-channel AWG
and ten 160-channel AWGs have been connected in a tandem configuration.
Recently, even a 5 GHz spaced, two-stage tandem demultiplexer with
4200 channels that covers the complete S-, C- and L-bands from 1460 nm

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices

147

to 1620 nm has been reported [60]. In this case the configuration was
a 20-channel AWG with 1 THz channel spacing and Gaussian passband as
a primary filter and twenty 5 GHz-spaced AWGs as secondary filters. Primary and secondary AWGs have been fabricated in 'n = 0.75% and
'n = 1.5% silica, respectively. The secondary AWGs have been fabricated
on 4-inch wafers, and UV laser trimming has been used for phase error
correction. The loss values of the whole device ranged from 7 to 12 dB and
the adjacent crosstalk ranged from 40 to 14 dB. The crosstalk worsened
periodically with channel number since side lobes in the transmission
spectrum of each secondary AWG increased as the channel deviated from
the centre channel.
Even a 16 channel AWG with 1 GHz channel separation has been realized already which uses a grating order as high as m = 11,818. The corresponding device layout had to be folded in order to fit onto a 4-inch wafer,
and in addition, phase errors had to be compensated in each grating arm in
order to make the device work [61].
On the other hand, AWG based de/multiplexers for CWDM applications
have been demonstrated which are typically dimensioned for 10 or 20 nm
channel spacing. Also very broad-band low channel count AWGs of low
grating order have been reported using a special AWG design [62]. Here
e. g. devices with one input and two output channels have been fabricated
operating at 1.0–1.55 µm, 1.31–1.53 µm, and 1.47–1.55 µm, respectively.

Athermal AWGs
In standard silica-based AWGs the centre wavelength of any output channel shifts by about
dȜ/dT = 1.2 · 10–2 nm/K or dȞ/dT = 1.5 GHz/K
at 1.55 µm. This is mainly determined by the temperature-induced variation of the refractive index of the silica glass, which is
dn/dT = 1.1 · 10–5 K–1.
For many applications, e. g. in WDM networks, the AWG-channel
wavelengths are stabilised by temperature control, either by use of a Peltier
element or more simply by a heater if the operating temperature of the
component is set to a higher temperature. The control requires additional
equipment and the availability of electrical power at the operation place.
The desire to get rid of this extra effort has spurred the development of
athermal (i. e. temperature insensitive) AWGs which exhibit stable filter
response over a certain temperature range, e. g. 0–85°C.

148

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

One realisation concept of athermal AWGs relies on replacing a section
of the standard waveguides by waveguides made of a material with a negative dn/dT value in order to compensate the temperature dependent optical
path length variation [63]. A material commonly used for this purpose is
silicone which has a rather large value
dn/dT = 37 · 10–5 K–1.
In this case only about 3% of the waveguide path in an essentially silicabased AWG has to be replaced by silicone. However, due to additional
light scattering at the interfaces between silica and silicone and a slightly
higher light loss in silicone the total AWG insertion loss is slightly enhanced by this procedure, typically by 2 dB. However, this excess loss can
be reduced to about 0.4 dB by segmenting a single trapezoidal silicone
region into multiple groove regions [64]. Polymer is another material utilized for the compensation of temperature-induced optical path variations
of silicon [65].
A different approach to achieve an athermal AWG is based on tracking
the AWG focal points, which exhibit a temperature-dependent move at the
slab output (or vice versa at the input) related to the optical path length
variation in the arrayed grating. Tracking is accomplished by fixing the
input or output waveguides to a metal arm (copper or aluminium) which
exhibits the appropriate thermal contraction or expansion [66, 67].
4.3.5 Interleave Filters
The combination of an AWG with an interleave filter (cf. Chap. 9) is an
efficient method to double the channel count of AWG-based
de/multiplexers without changing the corresponding AWG-design. The
interleave filter separates WDM channels, which have equal spacing, into
two groups with twice the spacing, and therefore, one interleaver filter plus
two AWGs with N channels is equivalent to one AWG with 2N output
channels and half the channel separation of each individual AWG. The
interleaver is basically a Mach–Zehnder-interferometer, but more sophisticated designs offer spectral characteristics which are more favourable than
a simple sin2(O) power-dependence. For example, flat-top characteristics
have been demonstrated by a Fourier transform filter composed of directional couplers and delay lines [68]. The advantage of this filter is that it
exhibits no excess loss other than fibre coupling and waveguide propagation loss.
Thus in addition to doubling the total channel number, the integration
of interleave filters and AWGs enables the construction of compact WDM

4.3 Silica-based AWG Devices

149

filters with wide pass-band and low insertion loss as well. Ref. [69] illustrates
the combination of a 50 GHz interleave filter with two identical 100 GHz
spacing 51-channel AWGs with their centre wavelengths shifted by 50 GHz
with respect to each other which provides a 102-channel 50 GHz-spacing
demultiplexer.
4.3.6 Commercially available AWGs
AWGs have become one of the standard filter types used in WDM networks,
and they are available from a number of different suppliers. These include
(at the time of writing this text) ANDevices, Gemfire, JDS Uniphase, and
Wavesplitter from the US, Hitachi-Cable, NEC, and NEL from Japan, PPI
from South Korea, and NKT from Denmark. There have been additional
suppliers in the past, in particular around the year 2000, which have either
closed down their business or have undergone mergers with other companies, and similar developments are likely to happen in the future as well.
Typical characteristics of commercially available AWGs are compiled
in Table 4.2, where the data in brackets refer to less common devices. Offered low channel-spacing filters, e. g. those with 25 GHz, are primarily
accomplished using an additional interleaver filter. The channel characteristics of AWGs have been primarily Gaussian a number of years ago, however, more recently flat-top characteristics have become predominant.
Two examples of filter characteristics of commercially available AWGs
in SoS-technology are shown in Figs. 4.9 and 4.10, one with Gaussian and
the other with flat-top shape.
Table 4.2. Typical characteristics of commercially available AWGs in SoS-technology
Quantity
Typical characteristics
Maximum channel number
up to 40
channel spacing
100, 50 GHz
Mode
Gaussian and flat-top
Wavelength range
C- and L-band
Temperature dependence
active temperature-control
Typical insertion loss
Gaussian:
< 3.5 ... < 5 dB
flat-top:
< 4.5 ... < 8 dB
Typical crosstalk
adjacent channel crosstalk > 25 ... > 30 dB
non-adjacent channel X-talk > 30 ... > 35 dB
Polarisation-dependent loss
< 0.35 ... < 0.50 dB
Added interleaving filter

2 and 4 channels, 25–100 GHz

Options
80
25, 200 GHz
S-band
athermal
< 2.5 dB

> 33 dB
< 0.2 dB

150

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.9. Wavelength characteristics of a 40 channel AWG with Gaussian passband

Fig. 4.10. 40 channel flat-top passband AWG

4.4 Applications

151

0

Transmission (dB)

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10
1550

1551
1552
Wavelength (nm)

1553

1554

Fig. 4.11. Comparison of Gaussian and flat-top AWGs (courtesy of ANDevices)

The differences between Gaussian and flat-top characteristics are illustrated in Fig. 4.11. As can be seen, the more favourable channel shape (i. e.
higher tolerance to wavelength variations) is accomplished at the expense
of a somewhat higher overall attenuation.

4.4 Applications
AWGs have found a large number of applications ranging from simple
add-drop multiplexers to complex-functionality crossconnects in telecommunications, and corresponding typical examples will be illustrated in the
following, while other applications such as in signal processing, measurement and characterisation, and sensing for example, are beyond the scope
of this chapter.
4.4.1 Add-drop Multiplexer
Generic add-drop multiplexer (ADM) configurations have been illustrated
in Sect. 4.2.8. A device consisting of three AWGs connected by 16 thermooptic switches has been the first fully integrated silica PLC-based ADM
that enabled full access to 16 individual wavelength channels [70]. In a second version [71] double gate switches were used and four AWGs were installed. This double-gate configuration enabled a remarkable improvement

152

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.12. Structure of a client-reconfigurable ADM, after [73]

in crosstalk: The on-off crosstalk from the main input to the main output or
any drop port was larger than 28 dB, and the on-chip insertion loss ranged
between 7.8 and 10.3 dB. Similar configurations using athermal AWGs and
TO switches in silica can be operated without temperature control of the
AWGs [72].
Other integrated optical add-drop multiplexers on silica PLCs reported in
the literature include a 32-channel ADM which can be re-configured to adddrop any of the 32 input channels from/to any of the 4 add-drop ports as illustrated in Fig. 4.12 [73, 74] and a 40-channel programmable add-drop filter
with flattened passbands [75]. For other examples see also Sect. 4.5.4.
4.4.2 Equalizer
Equalizers for power and dispersion are often needed in WDM networks,
especially in ultralong-haul (> 100 km) systems.
The equalization of channel power in order to compensate for residual
gain ripple in optical amplifiers, sudden channel power changes, and incorrectly added channel powers in optical add-drop multiplexers normally requires dynamic gain equalizers. On the other hand, fixed dispersion equalizers are usually adequate for the compensation of large delay time
differences. A large variety of compensation schemes have been developed
for these purposes including mechanical [76], acoustooptic [77], and planar

4.4 Applications

153

lightwave circuits containing AWGs as key elements [78, 79, 80]. These
conventional equalizers consist of a demultiplexer-multiplexer pair and, in
between, attenuators or amplifiers and delay lines, respectively (see also
Sect. 4.5.4, Fig. 4.25).
The introduction of erbium-doped fibre amplifiers has greatly increased
the transmission distance in optical fibre communications, and chromatic
dispersion has now become the main factor limiting the maximum repeater
span. Several techniques have been reported for the compensation of the
corresponding signal distortion in optical links [81, 82] including latticeform dispersion equalizers made in silica PLCs [83]. However, it is rather
difficult to fabricate a dispersion equalizer by the lattice-form configuration having both wide operational bandwidth and large delay compensation
capability.
A PLC dispersion equalizer, which satisfies both requirements, has been
realized utilizing two AWGs (25 GHz channel spacing, 3200 GHz (25.6 nm)
free spectral range, Oc = 1.55 µm centre wavelength) as a demultiplexermultiplexer pair and multiple delay arms in between [84]. In this special case
two diffraction orders m = 59 and 60 had to be used by constraints of the delay arm layout. The delay arm lengths were designed to compensate for the
delay time W O introduced by a specific length of a given dispersion-shifted
fibre (DSF). The waveguide length 'l of the i-th delay arm is given by

' l ( Oi )

l max  [W (Oi )  W (O c )] 

cL
nc

(4.14)

where lmax is the maximum arm length for the dispersion-zero centre wavelength Oc, W(Oi) is the delay for each AWG channel wavelength Oi along the
fibre span with length L (= 400 km). It has been shown that over 10 nm
wavelength range this equalizer can almost completely compensate the
delay accumulated over 400 km of DSF.
4.4.3 WDM-PON Overlay Device
Passive optical networks (PON), which use passive, wavelength-independent optical splitters for power splitting/branching and time division
multiplexing for upstream and downstream signalling, constitute a low
cost solution for many applications.
The upgrade of existing broadcast PONs with broadband interactive
services by employing high density wavelength division multiplexing
(WDM) represents an attractive way of exploiting the huge optical fibre
capacity more efficiently and of adding additional features to the access
network such as privacy for example, since individual subscribers can be

154

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

addressed by separate WDM channels. For a WDM/PON with well defined wavelength channels, the broadcast signal and the WDM channels
can be distributed over the same optical network, each using separate
wavelength bands [85, 86], see also Appendix, Sect. A.2.
A number of integrated WDM-PON devices fabricated in silica waveguide technology have been reported which utilize AWGs as de/multiplexers for specific wavelength bands. One solution, which enables a 1.31 µm
wavelength broadcast overlay over eight WDM channels in the 1.55 µm
wavelength band, uses individual coarse wavelength selective 1 u 2 couplers for overlay in each channel [87]. Waveguide crossings are inevitable
in such a structure. Another solution that is suitable for much smaller separation of both wavelength bands uses a specially designed AWG with
chirped grating which acts like an optical multiplexer in one wavelength
band and as an optical power splitter in another one [88].
Other solutions for WDM-PON overlay devices have been demonstrated
that make use of the inherent overlay features of AWGs with their different grating orders and which utilize wavelength dispersion and imaging
properties between input and output [89–95] as described in Sect. 4.2.1.
This concept can be adapted to a wide range of band separations and can
even enable an overlay of more than two bands.
In one corresponding solution the device is composed of an AWG demultiplexer for the WDM channels, a 1/N power splitter for the broadcast
wavelength, and an overlay-AWG of low order. The latter provides the
two-band multiplexing, essentially due to its imaging properties. A 1.31 µmbroadcast/ 1.55 µm-WDM overlay and a 1.50 µm-broadcast/ 1.55 µm-WDM
overlay have been realized as well (cf. column 1 in Table 4.3). In another
approach the required demux/overlay-mux functionality was implemented
by one specially designed AWG only which again was combined with a
distributing star-coupler attached in front of it [91, 92] (columns 2 and 3 in
Table 4.3). All these devices carried 8 WDM channels in the 1.55 µm band
with 200 GHz and 100 GHz spacing, respectively,
The general AWG behaviour is described by (4.15), where TIN and TOUT
represent the angles between the respective slab centre axis and the attached input/output waveguides.

Ti, IN

º½°
ª 1 dnwg
m ­°
Oi  OC »¾  Ti, OUT
® Oi  OC «1
ns d °̄
»¼°¿
«¬ nwg dO

(4.15)

In this equation, Oi is the signal wavelength and m is the grating order at
Oi, O c is the design centre wavelength at order m, d is the grating pitch, and
ns and nwg are the effective refractive indices at O c of the slab and the grating waveguides, respectively. This equation takes into account also the

4.4 Applications

155

Ob
IMAGING (m)

AWG

O 1 O N

IMAGING (m+k)

O b, O1

DEMUX (m)

O b ,ON



Ob

Fig. 4.13. Design principle of a broadcast WDM/PON overlay device using demultiplexing and imaging properties of an AWG, using different grating orders m and m + k

chromatic material dispersion by a linear fit of nwg around Oc (given in
square brackets). The input/output waveguide positions at both slabs are
x = T f , where f is the slab focal length.
The method of operation is illustrated schematically in Fig. 4.13. The
typical AWG demux functionality for WDM wavelengths O1 ... ON between
the common WDM input port and N output ports is obtained using grating
order m. The overlay functionality of a broadcast signal at wavelength Ob
onto these N output ports utilizes imaging from properly set N input ports.
If the imaging position of the Ob-comb from the star-coupler at the AWG
input were k·FSR away from the centre axis with respect to order m, then
one uses an order mrk, depending on the sign of the wavelength shift
'Oband. Obviously a multiple choice of the broadcast wavelength in such
a device is possible, spaced by the FSR of the AWG. The FSR determined
by the chosen order m should be large enough to cover all inputs without
overlap.
Furthermore, a 3-band PON-AWG configuration has been realized
(column 3 in Table 4.3) which combines the mux- and demux capabilities
of 2 u 8 WDM up- and downstream channels and the overlay of 8 distributed broadcast channels onto the WDM downstream channels (see
Fig. 4.14). Two bands of them are identical in their functionality to the
previous ones (orders m = 100 and m = 102). The additional third band is

156

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.14a. Principle of a broadcast PON / WDM
overlay device using multi-/demultiplexing and
imaging properties of an AWG, consulting different
grating orders m

Fig. 4.14b. Input and output
sections of the corresponding
AWG device

used for 8 upstream WDM channels from the users to the central office
(order m = 99). All these 8 upstream channels are multiplexed by the
AWG and directed to one output port. Corresponding experimental results
are shown in Fig. 4.15.
Table 4.3. Measured features of three of the above-mentioned WDM-PON overlay
devices fabricated as silica PLCs
Overlay device Type 1
1.31 / 1.55 µm
Ob / OWDM
diffraction order
m
3(Ob)
WDM mode

pass through

Type 3
1.50 / 1.55 µm
102 (Ob)
99 (OWDM /up)
100 (OWDM /down)
DEMUX, m = 68 DEMUX, m = 99,100

Ob

no. of channels
excess loss
'O 3dB
method

8
11 dB r 2 dB
50 nm
horn

8
4.5 dB r 1.2 dB
0.8 nm
star

8
5.5 dB r 1.2 dB
0.4 nm
star

OWDM

channel spacing

1.6 nm
(200 GHz)
3.8 dB – 5.2 dB
8 nm
> 25 dB

1.6 nm
(200 GHz)
3 dB
0.65 nm
> 25 dB

0.8 nm
(100 GHz)
3 dB
0.35 nm
> 27 dB

insertion loss
'O 3dB
crosstalk

Type 2
1.50 / 1.55 µm
70 (Ob)
68 (OWDM)

4.4 Applications

transmission / dB

0

diffraction order
m=100

157

m=99

up

down

-10

-20

-30

-40
1530

1535

1540

1545

1550

1555

1560

wavelength / nm

Fig. 4.15. (a) Experimental results for the 2 u 8 ports of type 3 WDM-PON overlay
device. Downstream channels around 1533 nm at order m = 100 and upstream channels
around 1557 nm at order m = 99 (bold curves). The centre loss amounts to about
2.5 dB. Dotted curves: additional WDM bands due to periodicity of AWG characteristics

excess loss / dB

0

loss 5.5 dB

uniformity 2.5 dB

-10

-20

-30

-40
1499

3 dB working range
'Ob = 0.4 nm
1500

1501

wavelength / nm

Fig. 4.15. (b) Measured excess loss of the distributing system for the broadcast wavelength Ob around 1500 nm at the ports OUTb (= OUTdown). The passband is broadened
to 0.4 nm by horn structures at the input

158

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

4.5 InP-based Devices
4.5.1 Introduction
The characteristics of InP-based AWGs are rather different compared to
silica-based ones, and in some respects InP is superior, in others silica-onsilicon is more favourable. The most important advantage of InP-based
AWGs is that they can be monolithically integrated with devices like lasers, semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA), RF-modulators and switches, wavelength converters, signal regenerators or detectors, for example.
Moreover, due to the high index contrast that is possible in semiconductor
waveguides, InP-based AWGs can be smaller than their silica-based counterparts by more than two orders of magnitude. Insertion-losses of InP and
silica AWGs are comparable. Crosstalk figures for InP-based AWGs are
lagging behind by 5–10 dB compared to silica devices (> 35 dB), however,
considerable improvement can be expected in the coming years. The most
important disadvantage of InP-based AWGs is their coupling losses to
single-mode fibres which are in the order of 10 dB because of the large
difference in waveguide mode size. Coupling losses can be reduced by
using lensed fibres, but at the price of a reduced alignment tolerance and,
as a consequence, higher packaging costs. For efficient and tolerant fibre
coupling integration of fibre-mode adaptors (also called spot-size converters or tapers) on the chip is mandatory. So far, this has prevented InPbased AWGs to become a competitor of silica-based AWGs for use as
stand-alone devices. The real advantage of InP-based AWGs lies in their
potential for integration in circuits with an increased functionality, such as
WDM transmitters and receivers, both for Metro and Access Networks,
and optical add-drop multiplexers. So far the market for this kind of functionalities has been too small to enable a real breakthrough of InP-based
Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs), but at the time of writing this chapter
the recovery of the WDM market is creating the conditions for broader
application of InP-based Photonic ICs.
The power of micro-electronic integration technology is that a broad
class of electronic functionalities can be synthesised from a small set of
elementary components such as transistors, resistors, and capacitors.
A technology that supports integration of these elementary components
can, therefore, be used for a broad class of applications, and investments
made in its development are paid back by a large market. Although
photonic integration has much in common with micro-electronic integration, a major difference is the variety of devices and device-principles in
photonics. For couplers, filters, multiplexers, lasers, optical amplifiers,
detectors, switches, modulators, etc. a broad variety of different operation

4.5 InP-based Devices

159

principles and materials have been reported. It is impossible to develop
a monolithic technology which is capable of realising even a modest subset
of all these devices. The key for the success of integration in photonics is,
therefore, the reduction of the broad variety of optical functionalities to
a few elementary components such as waveguides, couplers, and generic
active components.
4.5.2 Fabrication
The first step in the fabrication of InP-based PICs is epitaxial growth of the
layer stacks required in the PIC. The most widely applied technology is
Metal-Organic Vapour Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE, mostly called MetalOrganic Chemical Vapour Deposition, MOCVD, which is a less correct
name, however). In this technology the materials (Indium, Phosphorous,
Gallium, and Arsenic) are carried to the reactor in gaseous form coupled to
methyl- or ethyl-groups (In, Ga) or as hydrides (As, P). In the reactor they
are thermally cracked and deposited onto the heated substrate, where they
crystallise in a composition that is dependent on the concentrations of the
constituent elements. During the epitaxy, both the composition of the crystal (the amounts of In, Ga, P, and As) and its lattice constant have to be
controlled, the latter to avoid formation of large numbers of crystal defects.
This can be achieved by tight control of the temperature and the gas flows.
By controlling the composition the properties of the material can be chosen
to be transparent or active (amplifying or absorbing), and also proper materials for use in modulators can be grown.
A major issue for photonic integration is the way in which active sections (laser and amplifier) are integrated with transparent sections (waveguide or modulator). In principle three different schemes can be distinguished, each with a number of variants. They are illustrated in Fig. 4.16.
In the first one active and transparent waveguides are in the same plane and
are coupled via a so-called butt-joint. The structure is realized by first
growing the active layer stack, selectively removing it while covering the
active regions with a mask, selectively re-growing the transparent regions,
while covering the active regions with a mask, and covering the whole
structure with a cladding layer in a third epitaxial growth step. The whole
process requires good equipment and skills because all layers should get an
almost perfect crystalline structure with well-controlled composition, morphology, and dopant level. In the second and third scheme the whole structure is grown in a single epitaxy growth, and the active layers are removed
afterwards while covering the active regions with a mask. In the second
scheme a thin active layer is applied on top of the transparent waveguide in

160

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.16. Three different schemes for integration of active (laser and amplifier) and
passive waveguides

such a way that the optical fields at both sides of the junction are not too
different so that the transition loss at the junction is small. Special provisions are necessary to avoid reflections. In the third scheme the light is
coupled from the lower transparent layer to the upper active layer. This
scheme needs special provisions for efficient coupling from the lower to
the upper layer. The single-step epitaxial growth schemes have the advantage of being simpler from a fabrication point of view. Both schemes have
been successfully applied for development of commercial products.
A disadvantage is the restricted flexibility: because the whole structure is
grown in one step, it is not possible to use different compositions and doping levels in different regions. This reduces the design freedom and the
number of different components that can be integrated.
Etching of InP-based waveguides is commonly done with Reactive Ion
Etching (RIE) with methane/hydrogen (CH4/H2) plasma [96]. Excellent anisotropy and smooth surfaces can be obtained. During etching a polymer
film deposits that can cause waveguide roughness and therefore optical
losses. The polymer can be removed during etching by using an etch process
where the CH4/H2 etching step is alternated with an O2 descumming step
[97], resulting in optical waveguide propagation losses below 1 dB/cm.
Another common etching method for InP-based materials is using inductively-coupled plasma RIE with Cl2/CH4/H2 chemistry. This results in
high etching rates while maintaining smooth morphology. Moreover, the
chlorine prevents the formation of polymers [98].
4.5.3 InP-based AWGs
The first InP-based AWG (de-)multiplexer was reported by Zirngibl et al.
[99]. This 15 u 15 channel device measured 1 cm2 and had an insertion loss
of 27 dB and a crosstalk > 18 dB. The InP-based device with the largest

4.5 InP-based Devices

161

Fig. 4.17. WDM-receiver chip (3.1 u 3.9 mm2) containing an AWG-demultiplexer
integrated with 8 detector diodes at the bottom [104]

number of channels so far is a 64-channel AWG with dimensions 3.6 u 7 mm2
reported by NTT [100], and it has a crosstalk level better than 20 dB. Small
device dimensions are achieved by applying deeply etched waveguides with
a high lateral index contrast which allow for small bending radii. Disadvantages of this solution are the high coupling losses at the discontinuity between
the array and the free propagation regions at both sides and the increased
propagation losses of deeply etched waveguides. Loss figures for compact
AWGs reported [100–102] range from 7 to 14 dB. These losses have been
reduced to 3 dB for an 8-channel AWG with dimensions 700 u 750 Pm2 using
a double etch process [103].
Polarisation sensitivity is an important issue. GaInAsP/InP DH-waveguide structures inherently have a strong birefringence which translates into
a TE-TM shift of several nanometres. A solution for InP-based AWGs is
found in compensating the polarisation dispersion of the phased array by
inserting a waveguide section with a different birefringence [104–106].
Figure 4.17 shows a polarisation-independent demultiplexer based on this
principle. In the triangular section the waveguide structure has been
changed by partial removal of the top layer and reduction of the waveguide
width which creates a local increase in birefringence. Through proper

162

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

design of the triangle this increased birefringence can compensate the birefringence in the rest of the array.
Another way of reducing the polarisation dependence is by adapting the
waveguide width of deeply etched waveguides, where the birefringence of
the DH-structure is compensated by the birefringence induced by the vertical waveguide walls. For single-mode waveguides with a core of quaternary material with a bandgap-equivalent wavelength around 1.3 Pm
(“Q1.3”) the waveguides become rather small, around 1.5 u 0.6 Pm2. To
relax the fabrication tolerance, the waveguide size can be increased, when
lowering the index contrast by using, for example, Q1.0 material for the
waveguide core.
Another point of relevance is the temperature sensitivity. In silica-based
AWGs several techniques have been proposed to reduce the temperature
sensitivity (cf. Sect. 4.3.4). As InP-based AWGs usually operate in an actively controlled temperature-stabilised environment the need for temperature insensitivity is less urgent. NTT has reported a temperature insensitive
AWG using a temperature compensation triangle [107].
A major issue in the development of photonic integration technology is
reduction of device dimensions. The key to reduction of device dimensions
is the application of high lateral index contrast (i. e. the index contrast in the
plane of the waveguide layer) realised by deep etching of the waveguides.
Because of the high index contrast between the semiconductor waveguide
(typical refractive index values around 3.3) and air, deeply etched waveguides provide strong light confinement. This allows for application of

deep

shallow

deep

Fig. 4.18. Deeply etched InP-based AWG wavelength demultiplexer with record small
dimensions

4.5 InP-based Devices

163

small waveguide widths, small bending radii, compact waveguide couplers,
and compact AWGs.
The price that is paid for the high contrast is increased propagation losses due to scattering at rough waveguide walls and increased insertion
losses at junctions between slabs and waveguide arrays as used in an AWG
where the finite resolution of the lithography causes abrupt closure of the
tapered inter-waveguide gaps. With a low index contrast the optical discontinuities caused by this closure are small; with deeply etched waveguides they can introduce a few dB loss per junction. A solution is the use
of a technology that supports a combination of low-loss shallowly etched
waveguides for interconnect purposes and at waveguide junctions with
locally deeply etched regions where short bends or other high-contrast
functions are required. Losses smaller than 0.1 dB per junction have been
shown at transitions between deeply and shallowly etched regions, so that
several transitions can be included in a circuit. Using such a technology
AWG-dimensions have been reduced below 0.1 mm2 [108], see Fig. 4.18.
This is more than two orders of magnitude smaller than the smallest silicabased devices reported so far.
An important feature of AWGs is their crosstalk performance. A major
cause of crosstalk are random errors in the phase transfer of the array
waveguides, due to random variations in waveguide width, layer thickness,
or composition. As far as these random variations occur on a spatial scale
comparable to the operation wavelengths they will also contribute to
propagation losses (scattering). Improvement of uniformity and smoothness will, therefore, affect both crosstalk and propagation loss in a positive
way. This is mainly a matter of lithographic and etching technology and it
will become better and better with progress in these technologies.
A second cause of crosstalk is the generation of higher order modes in
the array at junctions between straight and curved waveguides or other
irregularities. Two approaches have been proposed to filter out higher order modes: application of mode filters halfway the waveguide array
[109, 110] and application of a special waveguide type that is leaky for
higher order modes [111]. Crosstalk levels around 30 dB have been demonstrated for InP-based AWGs using these approaches.
4.5.4 AWG-based Circuits

Multi-wavelength Transmitters
Today’s WDM systems use wavelength-selected or tuneable lasers as sources. Multiplexing a number of wavelengths into one fibre is done using
a power combiner or a wavelength multiplexer. A disadvantage of this

164

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.19. 10 u 10 Gbit/s transmitter with DFB array and AWG multiplexer integrated
on a single InP chip [114]

solution is the large number of lasers required, each of which has to be
wavelength-controlled individually. Using a power combiner for multiplexing the different wavelengths into a single fibre is a tolerant method, but it
introduces a loss of at least 10 log N dB, N being the number of wavelength
channels. The combination loss can be reduced by applying a wavelength
multiplexer at the cost of more stringent requirements on the control of the
laser wavelengths. Integrated multi-wavelength lasers have been realised
by combining a DFB-laser array (with a linear frequency spacing) with
a power combiner on a single chip [112, 113]. An advanced multi-wavelength transmitter module using a wavelength multiplexer for combining
the signals was recently published by Infinera, see Fig. 4.19 [114].
This very advanced 10-channel device with a channel spacing of
200 GHz contains a tuneable DFB laser, a power monitor, an electroabsorption modulator, and an attenuator for each channel, respectively.
The signals are combined in an AWG and coupled via a spot-size converter to the single output fibre. Each channel operates at 10 Gbit/s for
a total bit rate of 100 Gbit/s. The similarly configured receiver circuit is
also demonstrated.
The need for tuning of the individual lasers can be avoided through an
elegant solution which integrates a broadband optical amplifier array with
a multiplexer into a Fabry–Perot cavity, as depicted in Fig. 4.20 (left) [115–
118]. If one of the SOAs is excited, the device will start lasing at the passband maximum of the multiplexer channel to which the SOA is connected.
All SOAs can be operated and (intensity) modulated simultaneously, in

4.5 InP-based Devices

165

Fig. 4.20. Multi-wavelength laser consisting of four optical amplifiers integrated with
a multiplexer in a Fabry–Perot cavity (left), and a multi-wavelength receiver (right)

principle. An important advantage of this component is that the wavelength
channels are automatically tuned to the passbands of the multiplexer and
that they are coupled to a single output port with low loss. The main disadvantage of this type of laser is its long cavity; the associated large roundtrip
time makes it less suitable for direct modulation at high data rates. Despite
their long cavity length these lasers exhibit single mode operation in a wide
range of operating conditions [116]. Direct modulation speeds up to around
1 Gbit/s have been reported. Error-free transmission of 16 channels over
627 km at 2.5 Gbit/s data rate has been demonstrated using two interspersed
8-channel multi-wavelength lasers [119]. The main potential of this type of
laser might be in applications at short or medium distances at medium bit
rates (622 Mbit/s).
When these lasers operate at a single wavelength only, they are often referred to as digitally tuneable lasers. Each wavelength channel in this type
of laser needs its own amplifier, so that the yield and size of the AWG is
limiting the maximum number of channels. A number of configurations
have been demonstrated to increase the number of wavelengths with
a reduced number of amplifiers needed. In these devices the number of
amplifiers scales with the number of channels N as N . An integrated
40-channel digitally tunable laser using 8 + 5 optical amplifiers and a single AWG was reported by Doerr et al. in 1999 [120]. In this device, each of
the 40 wavelengths can be addressed by activating two amplifiers simultaneously. The low output power of this laser, which is inherent in the design, was overcome in a novel design that employed two AWGs and 7 + 8
amplifiers to obtain a 56-channel digitally tuneable laser measuring
5 u 5 mm2 [121]. A similar 16-channel integrated device has been reported
that uses a different configuration of the AWGs and amplifiers [122].
The AWG-based multi-wavelength lasers mentioned above are of the FPcavity type. In 1997, Miyazaki et al. demonstrated a multi-wavelength laser
that uses a combination of two silica-based AWGs with EDFAs in a ring
configuration [125, 126]. Recently, monolithically integrated multi-wavelength ring lasers have been reported. An example is shown in Fig. 4.21.

166

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.21. Monolithically
1.0 u 1.5 mm2 [123, 124]

integrated

multi-wavelength

ring

laser

measuring

This device, which measures only 1.5 mm2, showed lasing behaviour at
7 different wavelengths with four amplifiers [123, 124]. Since ring lasers
do not need mirrors, they are particulary suitable for integration into larger
circuits.

Multi-wavelength Receivers
The most straightforward way to realise a multi-wavelength receiver is by
connecting N detectors to the output ports of a wavelength demultiplexer.
Integration of an AWG-based demultiplexer with detectors on a single chip

Fig. 4.22. WDM-receiver chip containing an AWG-demultiplexer integrated with
8 photodiodes (top and bottom), the chip measures 3 u 5 mm2 [127]

4.5 InP-based Devices

167

has been reported by several authors [104, 127130], and one of these devices is shown in Fig. 4.22. The photodetectors are twin guide structures
grown in a single epitaxial growth on top of the waveguiding layer and have
been placed around the chip in order to reduce the electrical crosstalk between the channels. The device has eight channels with a 3-dB electrical
bandwidth of 25 GHz and a responsivity around 0.2 A/W at a wavelength of
1550 nm. Optical crosstalk between the channels is > 18 dB. The device
reported in [130] has similar characteristics, but integrates a spot-size converter, resulting in an increased responsivity of 0.46 A/W. A 4-channel device, similar to these, hybridly integrated with 4 frontend amplifiers and
packaged in a 26-pin butterfly package, operating at 10 Gbit/s is commercially available from ThreeFive Photonics. A 10-channel multi-wavelength
(MW)-receiver operating at 10 Gbit/s per channel was reported by Infinera,
matching the 10 u 10 Gbit/s transmitter module described above [114]. This
device has the highest aggregated throughput of 100 Gbit/s demonstrated to
date. An example of a highly sophisticated commercially available device is
the 40-channel optical monitor shown in Fig. 4.23. The device integrates
9 AWGs with 40 detectors on a chip area of less than 5 u 5 mm2, thus combining high integration density with good performance: 4 dB total on-chip
loss, 0.4 A/W responsivity, and a crosstalk level > 35 dB. These devices
illustrate the volume reduction that can be achieved using monolithic integration.
In InP the receiver amplifiers can also be integrated; this was first reported by Chandrasekhar et al. who realized an 8 u 2.5 Gbit/s multi-wavelength-receiver with integrated heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT)
preamplifiers [131]. Monolithic integration has the potential to bring down

Fig. 4.23. 40-channel optical monitor chip containing 9 AWGs and 40 detectors (courtesy ThreeFive Photonics)

168

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

the cost and increase the reliability of MW-receiver modules. It further
leads to a drastic volume reduction with an increased functionality. Main
challenges to exploit the advantage of integration are the problems related
to electrical crosstalk inside the package. For devices with larger channel
count special care has to be taken to reach acceptable crosstalk figures at
data rates higher than 1 Gbit/s.

Channel Selectors and Equalizers
Arrayed waveguide gratings can be used as tuneable filters or channel selectors. In their simplest form, a pair of AWGs is used back-to-back, the
first AWG demultiplexes the N channels and the second multiplexes them
again. When the AWGs are connected by an array of N amplifiers (see
Fig. 4.24), one or more wavelength channels can be selected and coupled
to the outputs. Wavelength selectors have been reported both in hybrid and
monolithic form. Monolithically integrated devices combine a small device

Fig. 4.24. Channel selector capable of selecting any combination of channels by activating one or more Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers. Schematic (top) and photograph of realized device [132] (bottom)

4.5 InP-based Devices

169

Fig. 4.25. Schematic layout of a power equalizer [80]

size with on-chip loss-compensation (zero-loss-between-fibres) at a potentially lower cost. In the basic configuration [132], the number of SOAs is
equal to the number of channels. The same device can be used as channel
power equalizer. For the power equalization function, attenuators may also
be used, instead of amplifiers. However, since the loss of such a passive
power equalizer using attenuators is too high for many networks, sophisticated solutions have been introduced.
One of these [80] uses a Mach–Zehnder interferometer (MZI), where
one arm is a simple waveguide, while the other arm contains a demultiplexer-multiplexer pair interconnected by an array of programmable phase
shifters whose effective path lengths can be controlled externally, as illustrated in Fig. 4.25. A proper splitting ratio in the MZI couplers assures the
required dynamic range for power equalization. Fractions R and 1-R of the
total power are sent to the “non-filtered” straight arm and the “filtered”
arm, respectively, and are then combined in the second coupler with the
same splitting ratio. In Fig. 4.25 the optical field strengths are indicated
instead of the optical power levels. Interference occurring for each channel wavelength leads to the final power level. This kind of equalizer can
have significantly lower loss than the conventional channel-by-channel
equalizer.
For channel selectors that make use of amplifiers, various solutions to
reduce the number of amplifiers have been demonstrated. Kikuchi et al.
[133] reported a device in which one out of 64 channels can be selected
using 16 SOAs that are operated as optical gates. In this device the reduction in the number of gates from N to 2 N was achieved with a two-step
selection using two AWGs and a power combiner (see Fig. 4.26). Note that
with this device, although any single wavelength can be selected, not every
combination of wavelengths can be selected, as it is the case with the general device. A variant with a two-step selection has been reported by Lucent and uses a combination of a star coupler and a single AWG to select
one out of 32 channels with 12 SOA gates [134].

170

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Fig. 4.26. Channel selector selecting one out of M u N channels using a combination of two AWGs and a power combiner

Multi-wavelength Add-drop Multiplexers and Crossconnects
The generic structure of reconfigurable add-drop multiplexers has been
illustrated in Sect. 4.2.8, and an early example of an InP based reconfigurable add-drop multiplexer can be found in [135]. This device integrates
4 Mach–Zehnder interferometer switches with a 5 u 5 AWG in a loop-back
configuration (cf. Fig. 4.8a).

Fig. 4.27. IST-STOLAS label-controlled optical crossconnect with non-blocking node
architecture

4.5 InP-based Devices

171

Another key device for advanced multi-wavelength networks is an optical crossconnect. Figure 4.27 shows an example of an experimental crossconnect which has been investigated in a European research project (ISTSTOLAS). In this project, data packets carry a label that is modulated orthogonally to the data payload: the data is intensity-modulated on a specific wavelength channel (at e. g. 10 Gbit/s), and the label is frequency- or
phase-modulated on the same channel (at e. g. 155 Mbit/s). In the crossconnect, the packets are routed by their wavelength, which is changed by
a tuneable wavelength converter according to the destination encoded in
the label. Then the packets are routed by means of a passive wavelength
router, after which the wavelength is converted to a wavelength selected
for the desired output. At the same time, collisions between two packets
for the same destination are thus avoided, making the node non-blocking.
The cost presently involved in crossconnects like these is prohibitive for
large-scale application of optical cross-connected networks. Application
will only be economical at the highest levels of the network where cost can
be shared by many users. For broader application, volume of devices like
these has to be ramped up while cost has to be reduced at the same time.
Present progress in photonic integration holds a great promise that this
goal can be achieved. Figure 4.28 shows the function, the circuit scheme,
and a photograph of a PIC which may be used to cross-connect two
fibre links. The device, which was monolithically integrated in InP-based

1

1

OXC

in

out

2

2

X

X

X

X

Fig. 4.28. Functional diagram (upper left), circuit scheme (middle left), dilated switch
layout (lower left) and microscope photograph (right) of a compact photonic integrated
crossconnect in a double AWG configuration. The AWGs are seen in the centre; the
triangular structures make them polarisation independent. The sixteen switches at the
right are positioned under a specific angle with the crystal axis to make them polarisation independent. The chip measures 8 × 12 mm2

172

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

semiconductor material, measures only 8 × 12 mm2 and contains two polarisation-independent AWGs, and 16 Mach–Zehnder interferometric switches (4 for each wavelength, in a dilated scheme) that are positioned under
an angle for polarisation-independent operation. The insertion loss was
< 16 dB and the inter-channel crosstalk > 20 dB. An even more compact
crossconnect with the same functionality and similar performance, but
measuring only 3.3 u 1.5 mm2, was also realized [136], demonstrating the
potential of this very compact technology. At present the performance of
PICs like this is not yet sufficient for operational applications. Silica-based
devices show better performance, but have a much larger device size. With
the ongoing progress in integration technology such crossconnects can
already be realised with much improved performance. When there is sufficient demand for such devices, this may give rise to a new generation of
highly sophisticated multi-wavelength networks.

4.6 Other Material Systems
AWGs have been realized primarily in silica-on-silicon (SiO2/Si) and on
indium phosphide (InP), but to a smaller extent in other material systems
such as polymers, silicon-oxinitride (SiON), and silicon-on-insulator (SOI)
as well.
Polymer optical waveguides and related PLCs have been fabricated using different materials, which all rely on a relatively low index contrast
comparable to that of silica-on-silicon, and as a consequence the device
properties are rather similar as well, which also applies to AWGs
[137140]. Some interesting features have been obtained with polymer
material, e. g. athermal AWG behaviour [141] or low power needed for
switching [142, 143], but the widespread expectation of particularly low
cost AWG devices has not been fulfilled so far. The main reasons for that
are a comparable device fabrication effort and in addition even higher pigtailing and packaging cost (in order to meet the Telcordia (Belcore) requirements), which essentially compensate or even go beyond the savings
in material cost. In addition, polymer AWGs do not yet meet the outstanding performance of present silica AWGs with respect to insertion
loss, crosstalk, and PDL.
On the other hand, silicon-oxinitride is a high-index contrast material
suitable for highly compact devices. Several reports on silicon-oxinitride
PLCs [144148] including small size AWG realizations have been published. But none of them has reached commercialisation up to now.
Silicon waveguide technology is another promising field of photonics
[149152]. It is based on the use of silicon-on-insulator wafers, offering

4.7 Methods for AWG Characterisation

173

a platform for diverse waveguide structures such as slab-, strip- , and ribwaveguides. All-Si waveguides rely on the very high index contrast, too.
But, especially rib waveguides offer single-mode behaviour up to rather
large dimensions, e. g. 10 µm, enabling low coupling loss to the fibre and
low propagation loss as well [153]. Therefore, SOI rib waveguides have
been preferred for AWG implementation. In addition, electrically controlled optical elements monolithically incorporated into the Si waveguide
have been demonstrated, namely µs-optical switches [154, 155], variable
optical attenuators (VOA) [156], and (slow) photodetectors [157]. Also,
SOI-based optical devices can take advantage of the highly-developed
silicon technology including the availability of high quality SOI wafers,
the applicability of CMOS compatible processing steps, and the possibility
to monolithically integrate Si-electronics. A number of promising AWG
devices have been shown in this material system [158160].
The SOI-based optical components technology had been pioneered by
Bookham Technology (UK). Bookham’s ASOC (‘application-specific optical circuit’) platform enabled the monolithic integration of passive optical
devices with other functionalities such as switching or channel monitoring
[155157] onto a single SOI chip, and one example is a 40-channel
100 GHz multiplexer arrayed-waveguide grating for WDM applications
monolithically integrated with variable optical attenuators >160]. Commercialisation of ASOC-platform devices started in 2002, but was discontinued
only one year later as a consequence of the downturn in the telecom industry. In 2005 these activities were renewed by Kotura Inc. who licenses silicon photonic patents from Bookham and appointed one of Bookham’s
founders to its board of directors. These patents cover the design and manufacture of silicon waveguide devices such as VOAs and modulators and the
construction of multi-functional optical silicon chips. As a first product,
this company brought a high-speed multi-channel VOA component in SOI
technology to market.

4.7 Methods for AWG Characterisation
Testing of fibre optic components such as de/multiplexers for DWDM
applications has become a great challenge due to high accuracy demands
versus constraints with respect to the affordable cost to generate the data
>161@. In many cases a limited set of data has to be determined experimentally, while other parameters are derived from these parameters (see
below).

174

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

4.7.1 Insertion Loss
One of the most important characteristics of passive optical components is
the insertion loss value, and for WDM applications insertion loss has to be
determined as a function of wavelength. Other parameters such as crosstalk between different channels or uniformity, for example, can be derived
comparing the insertion loss values at different wavelengths.
Since insertion loss is the ratio of two power levels (cf. Glossary), two
measurement steps are required for each specific wavelength:
1. The reference power, i. e. the power Pref without the device under test
(DUT), must be recorded.
2. Then the DUT is inserted and the output power Pout after the DUT is
measured.
In the case of a pigtailed device the insertion loss, essentially given by
Pout / Pref, does not only include any errors of the measurement system, but
the uncertainty related to the loss of one connector pair. The latter problem
is frequently circumvented by splicing the DUT into the signal path and
cutting the fibre before taking the reference reading.
In contrast to absolute power measurements, the uncertainty of an insertion loss measurement is not affected by the uncertainty of the detector
sensitivity, and one has to ensure only that the detector’s power linearity is
sufficient.
4.7.2 Wavelength-dependent Measurements
One key issue in wavelength-dependent testing is (in addition to absolute
wavelength accuracy) the selection of the most appropriate method to do
swept-wavelength testing. Most frequently one chooses between one of the
following options:
a) A broadband light source is used and the wavelength discrimination is
done at the detector site by sweeping the narrow detector pass band over
the whole wavelength range of interest. This measurement principle is
realized in optical spectrum analysers (OSA). Typical sources used are
either a white light source (halogen lamp), or one or more edge emitting
LEDs (EELED). The proper choice of source depends on the wavelength measurement range and the output power needed.
b) A narrow-band tuneable light source (frequently an external cavity
tuneable laser) is used to excite the DUT and the receiver is a nonselective detector, usually a semiconductor photo-detector.

4.7 Methods for AWG Characterisation

175

Both methods introduce characteristic accuracy and sensitivity limitations. In the first case (using an OSA) resolution bandwidth (typically
> 50 pm) is normally the most severe limitation, and as a consequence narrow features cannot be spectrally resolved.
On the other hand, if the light source is a tuneable laser, the so-called
source spontaneous emission (SSE) is a limiting factor. The SSE appears
as a broad continuum below the laser emission peak, and if a broadband
detector is used, the SSE gives rise to a receiver signal even in the stop
band region of the filter, which limits the achievable dynamics.
Consequently, best results are achieved by combining a tuneable laser
source and an OSA (i. e. combining a narrow source and a narrowband
receiver). However, as this solution is rather expensive, it is only used for
the most demanding applications.
4.7.3 Polarisation-dependent Loss
Optical signals propagating in fibre networks comprising a large number
of active (e. g. optical amplifiers) and passive components do usually not
have a well-defined state of polarisation. As a consequence, modern communication systems require components with low polarisation dependence
(or low polarisation-dependent loss (PDL)). For this reason the evaluation
of PDL has become important, and two methods are commonly used in
evaluating PDL.
a) All polarisation states are applied to the DUT, and the states of maximum and minimum transmittance are determined. In the case of an
AWG demultiplexer with low or moderate PDL under test, a convenient
and fast procedure is the following: One first chooses a wavelength with
arbitrary polarisation that lies at the steep edge of a filter peak. This can
be for example a wavelength at the –10 dB decay point from the filter
peak. Subsequently one changes the incoming polarisation, e. g. by
twisting the fibre paddles in a convenient apparatus or by means of a polarisation controller. These changes do normally induce variations of the
output signal intensity, and the two states with maximum and minimum
transmittance usually correspond to the TE- and TM-polarisation states
of the inserted light. The wavelength-dependent device characterisation
is then performed using these two settings. Systematic errors may arise
from the PDL and the reflection of the test equipment itself, which does
consequently need appropriate attention.
b) The so-called Mueller/Stokes method is based upon the application of
four defined polarisation states to the DUT and subsequent calculation
of polarisation dependence using Mueller mathematical formulas.

176

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

Application of this method requires a programmable polarisation controller (PC) that is able to generate polarisation states which uniformly
cover the entire Poincaré sphere [162]. In addition, the optical source
power at the DUT should be time-invariant and exhibit no polarisation
dependence. The procedure consists of the following steps: 1. maximize
power throughput by adjusting the polariser, 2. measure the output
power of the PC at four different polarisation states: horizontal, vertical,
+45°, and right-hand circular, 3. insert the test device and measure again
under the same polarisation states, 4. calculate max / min transmissions
using the 8 measurement results and Mueller mathematics, 5. calculate
the PDL.
For all PDL measurements a detector with low polarisation dependence
is mandatory.

References
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

M. K. Smit: “New focusing and dispersive planar component based on an optical
phased array,” Electron. Lett. 24, 385–386 (1988)
H. Takahashi, S. Suzuki, K. Kato, and I. Nishi: “Arrayed-waveguide grating for
wavelength division multi/demultiplexer with nanometer resolution,” Electron.
Lett. 26, 87–88 (1990)
C. Dragone: “An N×N optical multiplexer using a planar arrangement of two star
couplers,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 3, 812–815 (1991)
M. B. J. Diemeer, L. H. Spiekman, R. Ramsamoedj, and M. K. Smit: “Polymeric
phased array wavelength multiplexer operating around 1550 nm,” Electron. Lett
32, 1132–1133 (1996)
J. T. Ahn, S. Park, J. Y. Do, J.-M. Lee, M.-H. Lee, and K. H. Kim: “Polymer
wavelength channel selector composed of electrooptic polymer switch array and
two polymer arrayed waveguide gratings,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 16,
1567–1569 (2004)
H. Okayama and M. Kawahara: “Waveguide array grating demultiplexer on
LiNbO3,” Integrated Photonics Research (IPR’95), Techn. Digest (Dana Point,
CA, USA, 1995), 296–298 (1995)
C. van Dam: “InP-based polarization independent wavelength demultiplexers,”
PhD thesis, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands (1997)
ISBN 90-9010798-3
M. K. Smit and C. van Dam: “PHASAR-based WDM-devices: principles, design
and applications,” J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 2, 236–250 (1996)
A. Klekamp and R. Münzner: “Calculation of imaging errors of AWG,” J. Lightwave Technol. 21, 1978–1986 (2003)
M. R. Amersfoort, C. R. de Boer, F. P. G. M. van Ham, M. K. Smit, P. Demeester,
J. J. G. M. van der Tol, and A. Kuntze: “Phased-array wavelength demultiplexer
with flattened wavelength response,” Electron. Lett. 30, 300–302 (1994)

References
11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.

177

M. R. Amersfoort, J. B. D. Soole, H. P. LeBlanc, N. C. Andreadakis, A. Rajhel,
and C. Caneau: “Passband broadening of integrated arrayed waveguide filters
using multimode interference couplers,” Electron. Lett. 32, 449–451 (1996)
C. Dragone. US Patent No. 5,412,744 (1995)
K. Okamoto and H. Yamada: “Flat spectral response arrayed waveguide grating
multiplexer with parabolic waveguide horns,” Electron. Lett. 32, 1661–1662
(1996)
K. Okamoto and H. Yamada: “Arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer with flat
spectral response,” Opt. Lett. 20, 43–45 (1995)
C. Dragone: “Efficient techniques for widening the passband of a wavelength
router,” J. Lightwave Technol. 16, 1895–1906 (1998)
A. Rigny, A. Bruno, and H. Sik: “Multigrating method for flattened spectral
response wavelength multi/demultiplexer,” Electron. Lett. 33, 1701–1702 (1997)
J.-J. He, E. S. Koteles, and B. Humphreys: “Passband flattening via waveguide
grating devices using phase-dithering,” Integrated Photonics Research (IPR’02),
Techn. Digest, (Vancouver, Canada, 2002), paper IFE2 (2002)
G. H. B. Thompson, R. Epworth, C. Rogers, S. Day, and S. Ojha: “An original
low-loss and pass-band flattened SiO2 on Si planar wavelength demultiplexer,”
Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’98), Techn. Digest, (San Jose, CA, USA,
1998), paper TuN1 (1998)
C. R. Doerr, L. W. Stulz, and R. Pafchek: “Compact and low-loss integrated boxlike passband multiplexer,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15, 918–920 (2003)
H. Takahashi, K. Oda, H. Toba, and Y. Inoue: “Transmission characteristics of
arrayed waveguide N×N wavelength multiplexer,” J. Lightwave Technol. 13,
447-455 (1995)
C. G. P. Herben, X. J. M. Leijtens, D. H. P. Maat, H. Blok, and M. K. Smit:
“Crosstalk performance of integrated optical cross-connects,” J. Lightwave
Technol. 17, 1126–1134 (1999)
H. Takahashi, Y. Hibino, Y. Ohmori, and M. Kawachi: “Polarization-insensitive
arrayed-waveguide wavelength multiplexer with birefringence compensating
film,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 5, 707–709 (1993)
K. Maru, K. Matsui, H. Ishikawa, Y. Abe, S. Kashimura, S. Himi, and
H. Uetsuka: “Super-high-' athermal arrayed waveguide grating with resin-filled
trenches in slab region,” Electron. Lett. 40, 374–375 (2004)
M. Kawachi: “Silica waveguides on silicon and their application to integratedoptic components,” Opt. and Quantum Electron. 22, 391–416 (1990)
K. Imoto: “Progress in high silica waveguide devices,” Integrated Photonics
Research (IPR’94), Techn. Digest (1994), 62–64 (1994)
Y. Saito: “Optical fibre technology - key to undersea cable development,” J. Asia
Electron. Union 5, 63–67 (1989)
C. D. Lee, W. Chen, Y.-J. Chen, W. T. Beard, D. Stone, R. F. Smith, R. Mincher,
and I. R. Stewart: “The role of photomask resolution on the performance of arrayed-waveguide grating devices,” J. Lightwave Technol. 19, 1726–1733 (2001)
C. H. Henry, G. E. Blonder, and R. F. Kazarinov: “Glass waveguides on silicon
for hybrid optical packaging,” J. Lightwave Technol. 7, 1530–1539 (1989)
Q. Lai, J. S. Gu, M. K. Smit, J. Schmid, and H. Melchior: “Simple technologies
for fabrication of low-loss silica waveguides,” Electron. Lett. 28, 1000–1001
(1992)

178

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

30.

S. Valette, J. P. Jadot, P. Gidon, S. Renard, A. Fournier, A. M. Grouillet,
H. Dennis, P. Philippe, and E. Desgranges: “Si-based integrated optics technologies,” Solid State Technol. 32, 69–74 (1989)
Y. P. Li and C. H. Henry: “Silica-based optical integrated circuits,” IEE Proc.
Optoelectron. 143, 263–280 (1996)
A. Kilian, J. Kirchhof, B. Kuhlow, G. Przyrembel, and W. Wischmann: “Birefringence free planar optical waveguide made by flame hydrolysis deposition
(FHD) through tailoring of the overcladding,” J. Lightwave Technol. 18, 193–
198 (2000)
Y. Inoue, H. Takahashi, S. Ando, T. Sawada, A. Himeno, and M. Kawachi: “Elimination of polarization sensitivity in silica-based wavelength division multiplexer
using a polyimide half waveplate,” J. Lightwave Technol. 15, 1947-1957 (1997)
S. Suzuki, S. Sumida, Y. Inoue, M. Ishii, and Y. Ohmori: “Polarization-insensitive arrayed-waveguide gratings using dopant-rich silica-based glass with thermal expansion asjusted to Si substrate,” Electron. Lett. 33, 1173–1174 (1997)
S. M. Ojha, C. G. Cureton, T. Bricheno, S. Day, D. Moule, A. J. Bell, and
J. Taylor: “Simple method of fabricating polarisation-insensitive and very low
crosstalk AWG grating devices,” Electron. Lett. 34, 78–79 (1998)
H. H. Yaffe, C. H. Henry, R. F. Kazarinov, and M. A. Milbrodt: “Polarizationindependent silica-on-silicon Mach–Zehnder interferometers,” J. Lightwave
Technol. 12, 64–67 (1994)
C. K. Nadler, E. K. Wildermuth, M. Lanker, W. Hunziker, and H. Melchior: “Polarization insensitive, low-loss, low crosstalk wavelength multiplexer modules,”
IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 5, 1407–1412 (1999)
Y. Inoue, M. Itoh, Y. Hibino, A. Sugita, and A. Himeno: “Novel birefringence
compensating AWG design,” Conf. Opt. Fiber Commun. (OFC’01), Techn. Digest (Anaheim, CA, USA, 2001), paper WB4 (2001)
R. Kasahara, M. Itoh, Y. Hida, T. Saida, Y. Inoue, and Y. Hibino: “Novel polarization-insensitive AWG with undercladding ridge structure,” Integr. Photon.
Res. (IPR’02) Technical Digest (Vancouver, Canada, 2002), paper Ife5 (2002)
Y. Hida, Y. Hibino, H. Okazaki, and Y. Ohmori: “10 m-long silica-based waveguide with a loss of 1.7 dB/m,” Integrated Photonics Research (IPR’95), Techn.
Digest, (Dana Point, CA, USA, 1995), 49–51 (1995)
Y. Hibino, H. Okazaki, Y. Hida, and Y. Ohmori: “Propagation loss characteristics
of long silica-based optical waveguides on 5-inch Si wafers,” Electron. Lett. 29,
1847-1848 (1993)
S. Suzuki, K. Shuto, H. Takahashi, and Y. Hibino: “Large scale and high-density
planar lightwave circuits with high-' GeO2-doped silica waveguides,” Electron.
Lett. 28, 1863–1864 (1992)
Y. Hibino: “Recent advances in high-density and large-scale AWG multi/demultiplexers with higher index-contrast silica-based PLCs,” IEEE J. Select.
Topics Quantum Electron. 8, 1090–1101 (2002)
B. Little: “A VLSI photonics platform,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’03).
Techn. Digest (Atlanta, GA, USA, 2003), 444–445 (2003)
K. Okamoto, K. Moriwaki, and S. Suzuki: “Fabrication of 64 × 64 arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer on silicon,” Electron. Lett. 31, 184–186 (1995)

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

References
46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.
52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

179

K. Okamoto, K. Shuto, H. Takahashi, and Y. Ohmori: “Fabrication of 128channel arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer with 25 GHz spacing,” Electron.
Lett. 32, 1474–1475 (1996)
H. Takahashi, I. Nishi, and Y. Hibino: “10 GHz spacing optical frequency division multiplexer based on arrayed-waveguide grating,” Electron. Lett. 28, 380–
382 (1992)
K. Okamoto: Fundamentals of Optical Waveguides (Academic Press, San Diego,
CA, 2000)
H. Uetsuka, L. L. Marra, K. Akiba, K. Morosawa, H. Okano, S. Takasugi, and
K. Inaba: “Recent improvements in arrayed waveguide grating dense wavelength
division multi/demultiplexers,” Proc. 8th Europ. Conf. Integr. Optics (ECIO’97),
Stockholm, Sweden, 76–79 (1997)
A. Sugita, A. Kaneko, K. Okamoto, M. Itoh, A. Himeno, and Y. Ohmori: “Very
low insertion loss arrayed-waveguide grating with vertically tapered waveguides,” J. Lightwave Technol. 12, 1180–1182 (2000)
Y. P. Li. US Patent No. 5,745,618 (1998)
K. Takada, H. Yamada, and Y. Inoue: “Optical low coherence method for characterizing silica-based arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexers,” J. Lightwave
Technol. 14, 1677–1689 (1996)
E. Pawlowski, B. Kuhlow, G. Przyrembel, and C. Warmuth: “Arrayed-waveguide
grating demultiplexer with variable center frequency and transmission characteristic,” Proc. 9th Eur. Conf. on Integr. Opt. (ECIO’99) Torino, Italy, 207–210
(1999)
S. Kamei, M. Ishii, T. Kitagawa, M. Itoh, and Y. Hibino: “64-channel ultra-low
crosstalk arrayed-waveguide grating multi/demultiplexer module using cascade
connection technique,” Electron. Lett. 39, 81–82 (2003)
Y. Hibino, Y. Hida, A. Kaneko, M. Ishii, M. Itoh, T. Goh, A. Sugita, T. Saida,
A. Himeno, and Y. Ohmori: “Fabrication of silica-on-Si waveguide with higher
index difference and its application to 256 channel arayed-waveguide multi/demultiplexer,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’2000), Techn. Digest, (Baltimore, MD, USA, 2000), 127–129 (2000)
Y. Hida, Y. Hibino, M. Itoh, A. Sugita, A. Himeno, and Y. Ohmori: “Fabrication
of low-loss and polarisation-insensitive 256 channel arrayed-waveguide grating
with 25 GHz spacing using 1.5% ' waveguides,” Electron. Lett. 36, 820–821
(2000)
Y. Hida, Y. Hibino, T. Kitoh, Y. Inoue, T. Shibata, and A. Himeno: “400-channel
25-GHz spacing arrayed-waveguide grating covering a full range of C- and
L-bands,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’01), Techn. Digest (Anaheim, CA,
USA, 2001), paper WB2 (2001)
K. Takada, H. Yamada, and K. Okamoto: “320-channel multiplexer consisting of
100 GHz-spaced parent AWG and 10 GHz-spaced subsidiary AWGs,” Electron.
Lett. 35, 824–826 (1999)
K. Takada, M. Abe, T. Shibata, M. Ishii, Y. Inoue, H. Yamada, Y. Hibino, and
K. Okamoto: “10 GHz spaced 1010-channel AWG filters achieved by tandem
connection of primary and secondary AWGs,” Proc. 26th Europ. Conf. Opt.
Commun. (ECOC’2000), Munich, Germany, paper PD3.8 (2000)

180

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

60.

K. Takada, M. Abe, T. Shibata, and K. Okamoto: “5 GHz-spaced 4200-channel
two-stage tandem demultiplexer for ultra-multi-wavelength light source using
supercontinuum generation,” Electron. Lett. 38, 572–573 (2002)
K. Takada, M. Abe, T. Shibata, and K. Okamoto: “1-GHz-spaced 16-channel
arrayed-waveguide grating for a wavelength reference standard in DWDM network systems,” J. Lightwave Technol. 20, 850–853 (2002)
R. Adar, C. H. Henry, C. Dragone, R. C. Kistler, and M. A. Milbrodt: “Broadband array multiplexers made with silica waveguides on silicon,” J. Lightwave
Technol. 11, 212-219 (1993)
Y. Inoue, A. Kaneko, F. Hanawa, H. Takahashi, K. Hattori, and S. Sumida:
“Athermal silica-based arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer,” Electron. Lett.
33, 1945–1947 (1997)
A. Kaneko, S. Kamei, Y. Inoue, H. Takahashi, and A. Sugita: “Athermal silicabased arrayed-waveguide grating (AWG) multiplexers with new low loss groove
design,” Electron. Lett. 36, 318–319 (2000)
D. Kim, Y. Han, J. Shin, S. Park, Y. Park, H. Sung, S. Lee, Y. Lee, and D. Kim:
“Suppression of temperature and polarization dependence by polymer overcladding in silica-based AWG multiplexer,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’03),
Techn. Digest (Atlanta, GA, USA, 2003), paper MF50 (2003)
G. Heise, H. W. Schneider, and P. C. Clemens: “Optical phased array filter module with passively compensated temperature dependence,” Proc. 24th Europ.
Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’98), Madrid, Spain, 319–320 (1998)
T. Saito, K. Nara, Y. Nekado, J. Hasegawa, and K. Kashihara: “100 GHz-32ch
athermal AWG with extremely low temperature dependency of center wavelength,” Opt. Fiber Comm. (OFC ‘03) vol. 1, Techn. Digest (Atlanta, Georgia,
USA, 2003), pp. MF47 pp. 57–59 (2003)
T. Chiba, H. Arai, K. Ohira, H. Nonen, H. Okano, and U. Uetsuka: “Novel achitecture of wavelength interleaving filter with Fourier transorm-based MZIs,”
Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’01), Techn. Digest (Anaheim, CA, USA,
2001), paper WB5 (2001)
M. Oguma, T. Kitoh, K. Jinguji, T. Shibata, A. Himeno, and Y. Hibino: “Flat-top
and low loss WDM filter composed of lattice-form interleave filter and arrayedwaveguide grating on one chip,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’01), Techn.
Digest (Anaheim, CA, USA, 2001), paper WB3 (2001)
K. Okamoto, K. Takiguchi, and Y. Ohmori: “16-channel optical add/drop multiplexer using silica-based arrayed-waveguide gratings,” Electron. Lett. 31,
723724 (1995)
K. Okamoto, M. Okuno, A. Himeno, and Y. Ohmori: “16-channel optical add/drop multiplexer consisting of arrayed waveguide gratings and double-gate
switches,” Electron. Lett. 32, 1471–1472 (1996)
T. Saida, T. Goh, M. Okuno, A. Himeno, K. Takiguchi, and K. Okamoto: “Athermal silica-based optical add/drop multiplexer consisting of arrayed waveguide
gratings and double gate thermo-optical switches,” Electron. Lett. 36, 528–529
(2000)
W. Chen, Z. Zhu, and Y. Chen: “Monolithically integrated 32-channel client
reconfigurable optical add/drop multiplexer on planar lightwave circuit,” Opt.
Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’03), Techn. Digest (Atlanta, GA, USA, 2003), paper TuE5 (2003)

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

References
74.

75.

76.
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.
86.

87.

88.

181

W. Chen, Z. Zhu, Y. J. Chen, J. Sun, B. Grek, and K. Schmidt: “Monolithically
integrated 32 × four-channel client reconfigurable optical add/drop multiplexer
on planar lightwave circuit,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15, 1413–1415 (2003)
C. R. Doerr, L. W. Stulz, M. Cappuzzo, E. Laskowski, A. Paunescu, L. Gomez,
J. V. Cates, S. Shunk, and A. E. White: “40-wavelength add-drop filter,” IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett. 11, 1437–1439 (1999)
J. E. Ford and J. A. Walker: “Dynamic spectral power equalization using microopto-mechanics,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 10, 1440–1442 (1998)
S. H. Huang, X. Y. Zou, S.-M. Hwang, A. E. Willner, Z. Bao, and D. A. Smith:
“Experimental demonstration of dynamic network equalization of three 2.5-Gb/s
WDM channels over 1000 km using acoustooptic tunable filters,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett. 8, 1243-1245 (1996)
K. Inoue, T. Kominato, and H. Toba: “Tunable gain equalization using a Mach–
Zehnder optical filter in multistage fiber amplifiers,” IEEE Photon. Technol.
Lett. 3, 718–720 (1991)
M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and B. Glance: “Digitally tunable channel dropping
filter/equalizer based on waveguide grating router and optical amplifier integration,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 6, 513–515 (1994)
C. R. Doerr, C. H. Joyner, and L. W. Stulz: “Integrated WDM dynamic power
equalizer with potentially low insertion loss,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 10,
1443–1445 (1998)
A. M. Vengsarkar, A. E. Miller, and W. A. Reed: “Highly efficient single-mode
fiber for broadband dispersion compensation,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf.
(OFC’93) Vol. 4, Techn. Digest (San Jose, CA, USA, 1993), post-deadline paper
PD13 (1993)
K. O. Hill, S. Theriault, B. Malo, F. Bilodeau, T. Kitagawa, D. D. Johnson,
J. Albert, K. Takiguchi, T. Kataoka, and K. Hagimoto: “Chirped in-fiber Bragg
grating dispersion compensators; linearization of dispersion characteristics and
demonstration of dispersion compensation in 100 km, 10 Gbit/s optical fiber
link,” Electron. Lett. 30, 1755–1756 (1994)
K. Takiguchi, S. Kawanishi, H. Takara, K. Okamoto, K. Jinguji, and Y. Ohmori:
“Higher order dispersion equaliser of dispersion shifted fibre using a lattice-form
programmable optical filter,” Electron. Lett. 32, 755–757 (1996)
A. Kaneko, T. Goh, H. Yamada, T. Tanaka, and I. Ogawa: “Design and application of silica-based planar lightwave circuits,” IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum
Electron. 5, 1227–1235 (1999)
U. Hilbk, T. Hermes, J. Saniter, and F.-J. Westphal: “High capacity WDM overlay on a passive optical network,” Electron. Lett. 32, 2162–2163 (1996)
C. R. Giles, R. D. Feldman, T. H. Wood, M. Zirngibl, G. Raybon, T. Strasser,
L. Stulz, A. McCormick, C. H. Joyner, and C. R. Doerr: “Access PON using
downstream 1550 nm WDM routing and upstream through a fiber-grating
router,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 8, 1549–1551 (1996)
Y. P. Li, L. G. Cohen, C. H. Henry, E. J. Laskowski, and M. A. Capuzzo: “Demonstration and application of a monolithic two-PONs-in-one device,” Proc. 22nd
Europ. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’96) Oslo, Norway, paper TuC.3.4 (1996)
M. Zirngibl, C. R. Doerr, and C. H. Joyner: “Demonstration of a splitter/router
based on a chirped waveguide grating router,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 10,
87–89 (1998)

182
89.

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

G. Przyrembel, B. Kuhlow, E. Pawlowski, M. Ferstl, W. Fürst, H. Ehlers, and
R. Steingrüber: “Multichannel 1.3 Pm/1.55 Pm AWG multiplexer/demultiplexer
for WDM-PONs,” Electron. Lett. 34, 263–264 (1998)
90. B. Kuhlow, G. Przyrembel, E. Pawlowski, M. Ferstl, and W. Fürst: “AWG-based
device for a WDM overlay PON in the 1.5-Pm band,” IEEE Photon. Technol.
Lett. 11, 218–220 (1999)
91. G. Przyrembel and B. Kuhlow: “AWG based device for a WDM/PON overlay in
the 1.5 Pm fiber transmission window,” in Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’99),
Techn. Digest, (San Diego, CA, USA, 1999), 207–209 (1999)
92. B. Kuhlow and G. Przyrembel: “WDM/PON overlay devices in silica technology
for the 1.5 Pm band,” Proc. 9th Europ. Conf. Integr. Optics (ECIO’99), Torino,
Italy, 215–218 (1999)
93. G. Przyrembel and B. Kuhlow: “AWG-based devices for a WDM overlay PON,”
in WDM Components, Chap. 29, pp. 87–94 (Opt. Soc. America TOP, 2005),
ISBN 1-55752-610-9
94. B. Kuhlow and G. Przyrembel: “Silica based PON-AWG with 2 × 8 up- and
downstream channels,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’02), Techn. Digest
(Anaheim, CA, USA, 2002), 695-697 (2002)
95. B. Kuhlow and G. Przyrembel: “Device for superposing optical signals with
different wavelengths,” US-Patent No. 6 347 166.
96. T. R. Hayes, M. A. Dreisbach, P. M. Thomas, W. C. Dautremont-Smith, and
L. A. Heimbrook: “Reactive ion etching of InP using CH4/H2 mixtures: Mechanisms of etching and anisotropy,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B. 7, 1130–1140 (1989)
97. Y. S. Oei, L. H. Spiekman, F. H. Groen, I. Moerman, E. G. Metaal, and
J. W. Pedersen: “Novel RIE-process for high quality InP-based waveguide structures,” Proc. 7th Europ. Conf. Integr. Optics (ECIO’95), Delft, The Netherlands,
205–208 (1995)
98. T. Yoshikawa, S. Kohmoto, M. Anan, N. Hamao, M. Baba, N. Takado, Y. Sugimoto, M. Sugimoto, and K. Asakawa: “Chlorine-based smooth reactive ion beam
etching of indium-containing III-V compound semiconductor,” Jpn. J. Appl.
Phys. 31, 4381–4386 (1992)
99. M. Zirngibl, C. Dragone, and C. H. Joyner: “Demonstration of a 15×15 arrayed
waveguide multiplexer on InP,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 4, 1250–1253
(1992)
100. M. Kohtoku, H. Sanjoy, S. Oku, Y. Kadota, Y. Yoshikuni, and Y. Shibata: “InPbased 64-channel arrayed waveguide grating with 50 GHz channel spacing and
up to 20 dB crosstalk,” Electron. Lett. 33, 1786–1787 (1997)
101. C. G. P. Herben, X. J. M. Leijtens, F. H. Groen, I. Moerman, and M. K. Smit:
“Ultra-compact polarisation independent PHASAR demultiplexer,” Proc. 24th
Europ. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’98), Madrid, Spain, 125–126 (1998)
102. H. Bissessur, P. Pagnod-Rossiaux, R. Mestric, and B. Martin: “Extremely small
polarization independent phased-array demultiplexers on InP,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett. 8, 554–556 (1996)
103. C. G. P. Herben, X. J. M. Leijtens, F. H. Groen, and M. K. Smit: “Low-loss and
compact phased-array demultiplexers using a double etch process,” Proc. 9th Europ. Conf. Integr. Optics (ECIO’99), Torino, Italy, 211–214 (1999)
104. C. A. M. Steenbergen, C. van Dam, A. Looijen, C. G. P. Herben, M. de Kok,
M. K. Smit, J. W. Pedersen, I. Moerman, R. G. Baets, and B. H. Verbeek:

References

183

“Compact low-loss 8 × 10 GHz polarization independent WDM receiver,” Proc.
22nd Europ. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’96), Oslo, Norway, 1.129–1.131 (1996)
105. M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and P. C. Chou: “Polarisation compensated waveguide
grating router on InP,” Electron. Lett. 31, 1662–1664 (1995)
106. C. G. M. Vreeburg, C. G. P. Herben, X. J. M. Leijtens, M. K. Smit, F. H. Groen,
J. J. G. M. van der Tol, and P. Demeester: “A low-loss 16-channel polarization
dispersion-compensated PHASAR demultiplexer,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett.
10, 382–384 (1998)
107. H. Tanobe, Y. Kondo, Y. Kadota, K. Okamoto, and Y. Yoshikuni: “Temperature
insensitive arrayed waveguide gratings on InP substrates,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 10, 235–237 (1998)
108. Y. Barbarin, X. J. M. Leijtens, E. A. J. M. Bente, C. M. Louzao, J. R. Kooiman,
and M. K. Smit: “Extremely small AWG demultiplexer fabricated on InP by using a double-etch process,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 16, 2478–2480 (2004)
109. M. Kohtoku, Y. Shibata, and Y. Yoshikuni: “Evaluation of the rejection ratio of
an MMI-based higher order mode filter using optical low-coherence reflectometry,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 14, 968–970 (2002)
110. N. Kikuchi, Y. Shibata, H. Okamoto, Y. Kawaguchi, S. Oku, Y. Kondo, and
Y. Tohmori: “Monolithically integrated 100-channel WDM channel selector employing low-crosstalk AWG,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 16, 2481–2483
(2004)
111. M. Kohtoku, T. Hirono, Member, S. Oku, Y. Kadota, Y. Shibata, and Y. Yoshikuni: “Control of higher order leaky modes in deep-ridge waveguides and application to low-crosstalk arrayed waveguide gratings,” J. Lightwave Technol. 22,
499–508 (2004)
112. M. G. Young, U. Koren, B. I. Miller, M. Chien, T. L. Koch, D. M. Tennant,
K. Feder, K. Dreyer, and G. Raybon: “Six wavelength laser array with integrated
amplifier and modulator,” Electron. Lett. 31, 1835–1836 (1995)
113. C. E. Zah, F. J. Favire, B. Pathak, R. Bhat, C. Caneau, P. S. D. Lin, A. S. Gozdz,
N. C. Andreadakis, M. A. Koza, and T. P. Lee: “Monolithic integration of multiwavelength compressive-strained multiquantum-well distributed-feedback laser
array with star coupler and optical amplifiers,” Electron. Lett. 28, 2361–2362
(1992)
114. R. Nagarajan, C. H. Joyner, R. P. Schneider, Jr., J. S. Bostak, T. Butrie, A. G. Dentai, V. G. Dominic, P. W. Evans, M. Kato, M. Kauffman, D. J. H. Lambert,
S. K. Mathis, A. Mathur, R. H. Miles, M. L. Mitchell, M. J. Missey, S. Murthy,
A. C. Nilsson, F. H. Peters, S. C. Pennypacker, J. L. Pleumeekers, R. A. Salvatore,
R. K. Schlenker, R. B. Taylor, H.-S. Tsai, M. F. van Leeuwen, J. Webjorn,
M. Ziari, D. Perkins, J. Singh, S. G. Grubb, M. S. Reffle, D. G. Mehuys,
F. A. Kish, and D. F. Welch: “Large-scale photonic integrated circuits,” IEEE
J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 11, 50–65 (2005)
115. M. Zirngibl and C. H. Joyner: “12 frequency WDM laser based on a transmissive
waveguide grating router,” Electron. Lett. 30, 701–702 (1994)
116. M. Zirngibl, B. Glance, L. W. Stulz, C. H. Joyner, G. Raybon, and I. P. Kaminow:
“Characterization of a multiwavelength waveguide grating router laser,” IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett. 6, 1082–1084 (1994)

184

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

117. C. H. Joyner, M. Zirngibl, and J. C. Centanni: “An 8-channel digitally tunable
transmitter with electroabsorption modulated output by selective area epitaxy,”
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 1013–1015 (1995)
118. A. A. M. Staring, L. H. Spiekman, J. J. M. Binsma, E. J. Jansen, T. van Dongen,
P. A. J. Thijs, M. K. Smit, and B. H. Verbeek: “A compact nine-channel multiwavelength laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 8, 1139–1141 (1996)
119. R. Monnard, A. K. Srivastava, C. R. Doerr, C. H. Joyner, L. W. Stulz, M. Zirngibl,
Y. Sun, J. W. Sulhoff, J. L. Zyskind, and C. Wolf: “16-channel 50 GHz channel
spacing long-haul transmitter for DWDM systems,” Electron. Lett. 34, 765–767
(1998)
120. C. R. Doerr, C. H. Joyner, and L. W. Stulz: “40-wavelength rapidly digitally
tunable laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 11, 1348–1350 (1999)
121. D. Van Thourhout, L. Zhang, W. Yang, B. I. Miller, N. J. Sauer, and C. R. Doerr:
“Compact digitally tunable laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 15, 182–184
(2003)
122. J. H. den Besten, R. G. Broeke, M. van Geemert, J. J. M. Binsma, F. Heinrichsdorff, T. van Dongen, E. A. J. M. Bente, X. J. M. Leijtens, and M. K. Smit: “An
integrated coupled-cavity 16-wavelength digitally tunable laser,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett. 14, 1653–1655 (2002) erratum: 15, 353 (2003)
123. J. H. den Besten, R. G. Broeke, M. van Geemert, J. J. M. Binsma, F. Heinrichsdorff, T. van Dongen, E. A. J. M. Bente, X. J. M. Leijtens, and M. K. Smit:
“A compact digitally tunable seven-channel ring laser,” IEEE Photon. Technol.
Lett. 14, 753–755 (2002)
124. E. A. J. M. Bente, Y. Barbarin, J. H. den Besten, M. K. Smit, and J. J. M. Binsma:
“Wavelength selection in an integrated multiwavelength ring laser,” IEEE
J. Quantum Electron. 40, 1208-1216 (2004)
125. T. Miyazaki, N. Edagawa, S. Yamamoto, and S. Akiba: “A multiwavelength fiber
ring-laser employing pair of silica-based arrayed-waveguide-gratings,” IEEE
Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 910–912 (1997)
126. N. Pleros, C. Bintjas, M. Kalyvas, G. Theophilopoulos, K. Vlachos, and
H. Avramopoulos: “50 channel and 50 GHz multiwavelength laser source,”
Proc. 27th Europ. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’01), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 410–411 (2001)
127. M. Nikoufard, X. J. M. Leijtens, Y. C. Zhu, T. J. J. Kwaspen, E. A. J. M. Bente,
and M. K. Smit: “An 8 × 25 GHz polarization-independent integrated multiwavelength receiver,” Integrated Photonics Research (IPR’04), Techn. Digest
(San Francisco, CA, USA, 2004), paper IThB2 (2004)
128. M. R. Amersfoort, J. B. D. Soole, H. P. Leblanc, N. C. Andreakakis, A. Rajhel,
and C. Caneau: “8 × 2 nm polarization-independent WDM detector based on
compact arrayed waveguide demultiplexer,” Integrated Photonics Research
(IPR’95), Techn. Digest (Dana Point, CA, USA, 1995), post-deadline paper PD3
(1995)
129. M. Zirngibl, C. H. Joyner, and L. W. Stulz: “WDM receiver by monolithic integration of an optical preamplifier, waveguide grating router and photodiode array,” Electron. Lett. 31, 581–582 (1995)
130. W. Tong, V. M. Menon, X. Fengnian, and S. R. Forrest: “An asymmetric twin
waveguide eight-channel polarization-independent arrayed waveguide grating

References

185

with an integrated photodiode array,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 16, 1170–
1172 (2004)
131. S. Chandrasekhar, M. Zirngibl, A. G. Dentai, C. H. Joyner, F. Storz, C. A. Burrus,
and L. M. Lunardi: “Monolithic eight-wavelength demultiplexed receiver for
dense WDM applications,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 7, 1342–1344 (1995)
132. R. Mestric, C. Porcheron, B. Martin, F. Pommereau, I. Guillemont, F. Gaborit,
C. Fortin, J. Rotte, and M. Renaud: “Sixteen-channel wavelength selector monolithically integrated on InP,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’2000), Techn.
Digest (Baltimore, MD, USA, 2000), 81–83 (2000)
133. N. Kikuchi, Y. Shibata, H. Okamoto, Y. Kawaguchi, S. Oku, H. Ishii, Y. Yoshikuni, and Y. Tohmori: “Monolithically integrated 64-channel WDM channel
selector with novel configuration,” Electron. Lett. 38, 331–332 (2002)
134. D. Van Thourhout, P. Bernasconi, B. Miller, W. Yang, L. Zhang, N. Sauer,
L. Stulz, and S. Cabot: “Novel geometry for an integrated channel selector,”
IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 8, 1211–1214 (2002)
135. C. G. M. Vreeburg, T. Uitterdijk, Y. S. Oei, M. K. Smit, F. H. Groen, E. G. Metaal,
P. Demeester, and H. J. Frankena: “First InP-based reconfigurable integrated adddrop multiplexer,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 188–190 (1997)
136. C. G. P. Herben, X. J. M. Leijtens, M. R. Leys, F. H. Groen, and M. K. Smit: “Extremely compact WDM cross connect on InP,” Proc. IEEE/LEOS Symposium
(Benelux Chapter), Delft, The Netherlands, 17–20 (2000)
137. T. Watanabe, Y. Inoue, A. Kaneko, N. Ooba, and T. Kurihara: “Polymeric arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer with wide tuning range,” Electron. Lett. 33,
1547–1548 (1997)
138. J. Kobayashi, Y. Inoue, T. Matsuura, and T. Maruno: “Tunable and polarizationinsensitive arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer fabricated from fluorinated
polyimides,” IEICE Trans. Electron. E81-C, 1020–1026 (1998)
139. J.-H. Ahn, H.-J. Lee, W.-Y. Hwang, M.-C. Oh, M. H. Lee, S. G. Han, H.-G. Kim,
and C. H. Yim: “Polymeric 1×16 arrayed waveguide grating multiplexer using
fluorinated poly(acrylene ethers) at 1550 nm,” IEICE Trans. Electron. E82-B,
406–408 (1999)
140. C. L. Callender, J.-F. Viens, J. P. Noad, and L. Eldada: “Compact low-cost tunable acrylate polymer arrayed-waveguide grating multiplexer,” Electron. Lett.
35, 1839–1840 (1999)
141. N. Keil, H. H. Yao, C. Zawadski, J. Bauer, M. Bauer, C. Dreyer, and J. Schneider:
“Athermal all-polymer arrayed waveguide grating multiplexer,” Electron. Lett.
37, 579–580 (2001)
142. N. Keil, H. H. Yao, C. Zawadzki, and B. Strebel: “Re-arrangeable nonblocking
polymer waveguide thermo-optic 4×4 switching matrix with low power consumption at 1.55 Pm,” Electron. Lett. 31, 403–404 (1995)
143. N. Keil, C. Weinert, W. Wirges, H. H. Yao, C. Zawadzki, J. Schneider, J. Bauer,
M. Bauer, K. Lösch, K. Satzke, W. Wischmann, and J. v. Wirth: “Thermo-optic
switches using vertically coupled polymer/silica waveguides,” Proc. 26th Europ.
Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’2000), Munich, Germany, 117–120 (2000)
144. G. L. Bona, E. Flück, F. Horst, B. J. Offrein, H. W. M. Salemink, and R. Germann:
“Flexible thermo-optical switch in SiON planar waveguides,” Proc. 9th Europ.
Conf. Integr. Optics (ECIO’99), Torino, Italy, 65–68 (1999)

186

4 Arrayed Waveguide Gratings

145. T. Shimoda, K. Suzuki, S. Takaesu, and A. Furukawa: “Low-loss, polarizationindependent silicon-oxynitride waveguides for high-density integrated planar
lightwave circuits,” Proc. 28th Europ. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC’02), Copenhagen, Denmark, paper 4.2.2 (2002)
146. F. Horst, R. Beyeler, G. L. Bona, E. Flück, R. Germann, B. Offrein, H. Salemink,
and D. Wiesmann: “Compact, tunable optical devices in silicon-oxynitride waveguide technology,” Integrated Photonics Research (IPR’2000), Techn. Digest
(Quebec, Canada, 2000), paper IThF1 (2000)
147. B. Schauwecker, M. Arnold, C. Radehaus, G. Przyrembel, and B. Kuhlow: “Optical waveguide components with high refractive index difference in siliconoxynitride for application in integrated optoelectronics,” Opt. Engineering 41,
237–243 (2002)
148. B. Schauwecker, G. Przyrembel, B. Kuhlow, and C. Radehaus: “Small-size silicon-oxynitride AWG demultiplexer operating around 725 nm,” IEEE Photon.
Technol. Lett. 12, 1645–1646 (2000)
149. A. P. Harpin: “Integrated optics in silicon: coming of age,” Silicon-based monolithic and hybrid optoelectronic devices," Proc. SPIE 3007, 128–135 (1997)
150. C. Z. Zhao, G. Z. Li, E. K. Liu, Y. Gao, and X. D. Liu: “Silicon on insulator
Mach–Zehnder waveguide interferometer operating at 1.3 Pm,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
67, 2448–2449 (1995)
151. I. Day, I. Evans, A. Knights, F. Hopper, S. Roberts, J. Johnston, S. Day, J. Luff,
H. Tsang, and M. Asghari: “Tapered silicon waveguides for low insertion loss
highly-efficient high-speed electronic variable optical attenuators,” Opt. Fiber
Commun. Conf. (OFC’03), Techn. Digest (Atlanta, GA, USA, 2003), 249–251
(2003)
152. U. Fischer, T. Zinke, B. Schüppert, and K. Petermann: “Singlemode optical
switches based on SOI waveguides with large cross-section,” Electron. Lett. 30,
406–408 (1994)
153. R. A. Soref, J. Schmidtchen, and K. Petermann: “Large single-mode rib waveguides in GeSi-Si and Si-on-SiO2,” IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 27, 1971–1974
(1991)
154. T. Aalto, M. Kapulainen, S. Yliniemi, P. Heimala, and M. Leppihalme: “Fast
thermo-optical switch based on SOI waveguides,” Photonics West, Proc. SPIE:
Integrated Optics: Devices, Materials, and Technologies VII, vol. 4987, 149–
159 (2003)
155. A. House, R. Whiteman, L. Kling, S. Day, A. Knights, F. H. D. Hogan, and
M. Asghari: “Silicon waveguide integrated optical switching with microsecond
switching speed,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’03), Techn. Digest (Atlanta,
GA, USA, 2003), vol. 2, 449–450 (2003)
156. I. E. Day, S. W. Roberts, R. O. Caroll, A. Knights, P. Sharp, G. F. Hopper,
B. J. Luff, and M. Asghari: “Single-chip variable optical attenuator and multiplexer subsystem integration,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC/IOOC’02),
Techn. Digest (Anaheim, CA, USA, 2002), 72–73 (2002)
157. A. Knights, A. House, R. MacNaughton, and F. Hopper: “Optical power monitoring function compatible with single chip integration on silicon-on-insulator,”
Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC’03), Techn. Digest (Atlanta, GA, USA, 2003),
vol. 2, 705–706 (2003)

References

187

158. B. Jalali, S. Yegnanarayanan, T. Yoon, T. Yoshimoto, I. Rendina, and F. Coppinger: “Advances in silica-on-insulator optoelctronics,” IEEE J. Select. Topics
Quantum Electron. 4, 938–947 (1998)
159. P. D. Trinh, S. Yegnanarayanan, F. Coppinger, and B. Jalali: “Silicon-oninsulator (SOI) phased-array wavelength multi-demultiplexer with extremely
low-polarization sensitivity,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 9, 940–942 (1997)
160. G. T. Reed and A. P. Knights: Silicon Photonics: An Introduction (Wiley, New
York, 2004)
161. A. Gerster, M. Maile, and C. Hentschel: “State-of-the-art characterization of
optical components for DWDM applications,” Agilent Technologies, Application Brief (2001)
162. Handbook of Optics, vol. I (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1994) Chap. 5 “Polarization,” ISBN 007047740X.

