TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS

Flip Chip Packaging
Demand for flip chip interconnect technology is being driven by a
number of factors from all corners of the silicon industry. To support
this demand, Amkor is committed to being the leading provider of
Flip Chip in Package (FCiP) technology. By partnering with proven
industry leaders, Amkor has brought high volume packaging and
assembly to the subcontract market. Since being the first OSAT to
provide FCiP solutions in 1999, Amkor has continued to introduce
innovative packaging solutions utilizing flip chip interconnect and
offers the broadest range of FCiP solutions on the market.

BENEFITS OF FLIP CHIP
f

Reduced signal inductance – because
the interconnect is much shorter
in length (0.1 mm vs. 1-5 mm), the
inductance of the signal path is greatly
reduced. This is a key factor in high
speed communication and switching
devices

f

Reduced power/ground inductance –
by using flip chip interconnect, power
can be brought directly into the core
of the die, rather than having to be
routed to the edges. This greatly
decreases the noise of the core power,
improving performance of the silicon

f

Higher signal density – the entire
surface of the die can be used
for interconnect, rather than just
the edges. This is similar to the
comparison between QFP and BGA
packages. Because flip chip can
connect over the surface of the die, it
can support vastly larger numbers of
interconnects on the same die size

f

Die shrink – for pad limited die (die
where size is determined by the edge
space required for bond pads), the
size of the die can be reduced, saving
silicon cost

f

Reduced package footprint – in some
cases, the total package size can be
reduced using flip chip. This can be
achieved by either reducing the die
to package edge requirements, since
no extra space is required for wires,
or in utilizing higher density substrate
technology, which allows for reduced
package pitch

What Is Flip Chip?
Flip chip is not a specific package (like SOIC), or even a package type (like
BGA). Flip chip describes the method of electrically connecting the die to
the package carrier. The package carrier, either substrate or leadframe,
then provides the connection from the die to the exterior of the package. In
“standard” packaging, the interconnection between the die and the carrier
is made using wire. The die is attached to the carrier face up, then a wire is
bonded first to the die, then looped and bonded to the carrier. Wires are
typically 1-5 mm in length and 15-35 µm in diameter.
In contrast, the interconnection between the die and carrier in flip chip
packaging is made through a conductive “bump” that is placed directly
on the die surface. The bumped die is then “flipped over” and placed face
down, with the bumps­connecting to the carrier directly. A bump is typically
60-100 µm high and 80-125 µm in diameter, while a copper pillar (CuP)
bump is typically a 40 µm high Cu pillar capped with SnAg.
The flip chip connection is generally formed one of two ways: using
solder or using conductive adhesive. By far, the most common packaging
interconnect is solder. Current solder options are eutectic Sn/Pb or leadfree (98.2% Sn, 1.8% Ag) compositions. The solder bumped die is attached
to a substrate by a solder reflow process, very similar to the process used
to attach BGA balls to the package exterior. After the die is soldered,
underfill is added between the die and the substrate.
Underfill is a specially engineered epoxy that fills the area between the die
and the carrier, surrounding the solder bumps. It is designed to control the
stress in the solder joints caused by the difference in thermal expansion
between the silicon die and the carrier. Once cured, the underfill absorbs
the stress, reducing the strain on the solder bumps, greatly increasing the
life of the finished package. The chip attach and underfill steps are the
basics of flip chip interconnect. Beyond this, the remainder of package
construction surrounding the die can take many forms and can generally
utilize existing manufacturing processes and package formats.

More recent package solution introductions have
begun to utilize an alternative flip chip interconnect
technique called Thermal Compression Non-Conductive
Paste (TCNCP). Rather than a two step solder-thenunderfill process, TCNCP accomplishes both in a single
step. Solder tipped, non-melting Cu pillar bumps are
pushed through a liquid epoxy underfill, then heat is
applied to both form a metallurgical bond and cure
the epoxy. The use of TCNCP + Cu pillar allows for finer
bump pitch geometries by maintaining standoff and
reducing shorting issues.

Bare die FCBGA cross section

Single piece lid FCBGA cross section

Wafer Bumping Technology
In support of flip chip assembly, Amkor has established
wafer bumping production lines within their Korea,
Taiwan, Portugal and China manufacturing facilities.
Amkor’s bumping is based on its proprietary
electroplating solder technology which is considered
the most advanced, robust, reliable and high yielding
process available in the marketplace. Eutectic Sn/Pb,
Pb-free (98.2% Sn/1.8% Ag) and Cu pillar bumping are
all available in volume production on 200 mm and 300
mm wafers.
f
f
f
f
f
f

Wafer sizes from 200 mm to 300 mm diameter
Full area array pitch available to 130 µm – perimeter
pad pitch to <100 µm
Cu Pillar, eutectic Sn/Pb and Pb-free (98.2Sn/1.8Ag)
compositions available
Low alpha (<0.02 cph) and ultra-low alpha (<0.002
cph) solders available
Polyimide repassivation available
Redistribution layer using plated Cu available

Packaging Options Using Flip Chip
Depending on the specific die and application
requirements, different package level solutions are
required. Thus flip chip interconnect can be used in
a wide range of package solutions, each focused on
specific benefits that serve a given market. Amkor
offers the widest possible range of flip chip packaging
solutions to meet the diverse needs of customers and
end users. Combining their extensive manufacturing
knowledge with all types of packaging interposers and
further leveraging their leadership role in flip chip
interconnect technology, Amkor continues to pursue
new package solutions.

Flip Chip BGA Package
Amkor FCBGA packages are assembled around stateof-the-art, single unit laminate or ceramic substrates.
Utilizing multiple high density routing layers, laser
drilled blind, buried, and stacked vias, and ultra fine
line/space metallization, FCBGA substrates have the
highest routing density available. By combining flip chip
interconnect with ultra advanced substrate technology,
FCBGA packages can be electrically tuned for maximum
electrical performance. Once the electrical function
is defined, the design flexibility enabled by flip chip
also allows for significant options in final package
design. Amkor offers FCBGA packaging in a variety of
product formats to fit a wide range of end application
requirements.
The variety of FCBGA package options allows package
selection to be tailored to the specific thermal needs
of the end product. High performance ASIC products
typically utilize a lidded format that features a
controlled bondline die attach direct to a copper heat
spreader. This feature produces the lowest possible
thermal resistance (Theta JC) between the package and
any externally applied thermal solution. The copper
heat spreader effectively spreads heat laterally away
from the die to the package perimeter and into the
motherboard.
Lower wattage products generally utilize bare die or
molded configurations. In these cases, the flip chip
construction, with solder bumps and core vias, provides
a lower resistance path from the active side of the die
through the substrate, allowing heat dissipation both
from the package surface and into the motherboard.
This IC packaging technology is applicable for high
pin count and/or high performance ASICs. Large body
FCBGAs provide package solutions for the demands of
internet, workstation processors and high bandwidth
system communication devices. By incorporating flip
chip interconnect technology, packages supporting
thousands of connections are enabled in conventional
surface mount package sizes. FCBGAs are also the
package of choice for gaming system processors and
graphics, as well as high-end applications processors
for leading-edge portable devices.

Package Options
f
f
f
f
f
f
f

Wafer node: ≥7 nm qualified (5 nm in development)
SMT components on top or bottom side
Multi-die capability
Memory components on top side
Variety of lid material options
Grounded lid
Custom BGA footprints

Flip Chip BGA Package (Cont.)

Flip Chip CSP Package

Technology

Features

f

f

f

f
f
f
f
f

Substrates
▷ 4-18 layer laminate build-up substrates
▷ High CTE ceramic
▷ Coreless
Bump types
▷ Eutectic Sn/Pb
▷ Pb-free
▷ Cu pillar (array and fine-pitch peripheral)
Package formats
▷ Bare die
▷ Lidded
▷ Molded
90 µm minimum array bump pitch
<100 µm minimum peripheral bump pitch
Die sizes up to 29 mm
Package sizes from 10 mm to 66 mm (85 mm in
development)
0.4 mm, 0.5 mm, 0.65 mm, 0.8 mm and 1.0 mm
pitch BGA footprints

f
f
f
f
f
f
f
f

Designed for high-frequency applications
Target market – cell phones, handheld electronics
Thin-core laminate or ceramic package construction
Overmolded for handling and second level reliability
Accommodates package sizes from 3 mm to 15 mm
Flip chip bump pitches of 150 µm mininum for
peripheral array, 250 µm minimum for area array
Available in 0.5-1.0 mm BGA ball pitch, as well as
LGA interconnect
Minimum package thickness of 0.80 mm for LGA
interconnect, 1.0 mm for 0.5 mm BGA pitch and 1.2
mm for 0.8 mm BGA pitch

fcCSP
Flip chip solution for CSP package technology

Flip Chip System in Package (SiP)
FCBGA/LGA (Bare die)
Flip chip packaging solution for most graphics, PC
chipset and low-end ASIC applications

fcCeramic CBGA/CLGA/CLLGA/solder
column interposer
Original packaging solution for flip chip products

Flip chip SiP package is an extension of the SiP product
offering from Amkor with the device interconnect
technology being flip chip rather than traditional
wirebond interconnects. The package may contain
multiple passive components, silicon and/or GaAs
devices bumped with traditional solder bumps or solder
coated copper pillar bumps housed in 2-layer or 4-layer
high-density substrates. This package format is gaining
traction in RF power amplifier and RF front end module
applications for size, performance and cost reasons.
Controlled collapse of the bumps leads to predictable
interconnect impedance and hence more stable
product performance. The low-solder volume in the
‘wetting tip’ allows for the elimination of the solder
mask from underneath the die which reduces the
substrate complexity and cost and removes a major
barrier for adopting the fine pitch FC interconnection
technology in the RF application space. Flip chip
interconnection may also preclude the need for
wafer backgrinding (for mold cap thickness 0.9 mm)
which leads to further reduction in product cost and
simplification of the process flow.

Flip Chip SiP (Cont.)

Wafer Level Packaging – CSPnl

The devices in this application space have low to
medium I/O count and are fairly small in size. This, in
conjunction with the solder mask being removed from
underneath the die (which increases the standoff),
makes these products viable candidates for transfer
molding applications. Thus, the underfill operation
can be eliminated from the process flow which leads
to significant cost savings. Studies have shown that
transfer molded packages are more reliable (MSL as
well as extended reliability testing such as temperature
cycling, HAST, etc.) than their underfilled counterparts
due to balanced die stresses and better solder CTE
matching.

CSPnl is a true wafer level package to address improved
second-level board reliability, that incorporates a thin
film redistribution process to route the pads to JEDEC
standard pitches. Standard CSP solder bumps are
formed on the re-routed pads. The CSPnl is designed
to utilize standard surface mount assembly and
reflow techniques. By using standard SMT placement
equipment, and avoiding the need for underfill, the end
user experiences many of the cost benefits associated
with other JEDEC standard area array packages.

Features
f
f
f
f
f
f

Copper pillar or solder bump for GaAs and Si
applications in LGA or BGA format

f
f
f
f

Incorporates standard JEDEC pitches and CSP solder
ball diameters
Compatible with standard SMT assembly and test
techniques
Utilizes cost-effective thin film redistribution
technologies
Backside laser mark compatible
No need for underfill in most applications
Full turnkey CSPnl processing including test and tape
& reel support
Eutectic lead-free solder balls
Available with polyimide repassivation
Qualified and in volume production
Proven reliability; exceeds all current handset
mechanical reliability tests including drop, bend and
key punch

Visit amkor.com or email sales@amkor.com for more information.
With respect to the information in this document, Amkor makes no guarantee or warranty of its accuracy or that the use of such
information will not infringe upon the intellectual rights of third parties. Amkor shall not be responsible for any loss or damage of
whatever nature resulting from the use of, or reliance upon it and no patent or other license is implied hereby. This document does not
in any way extend or modify Amkor’s warranty on any product beyond that set forth in its standard terms and conditions of sale. Amkor
reserves the right to make changes in its product and specifications at any time and without notice. The Amkor name and logo are
registered trademarks of Amkor Technology, Inc. All other trademarks mentioned are property of their respective companies.
© 2021 Amkor Technology, Incorporated. All Rights Reserved. TS102P-EN Rev Date: 02/21

