Amkor’s 2.5D Package and HDFO – Advanced
Heterogeneous Packaging Solutions
John Lee, Sr. Director, Amkor Technology, Inc.
Mike Kelly, VP, Adv Package & Technology Integration, Amkor Technology, Inc.
Abstract:
The latest wave of technology evolution is based on artificial intelligence (AI), deep learning, cloud computing
and more. These leading-edge technologies all share a common feature: ultra high-speed computing integrated
circuits (ICs). In addition to the advancement of the main chip itself to more advanced process nodes, it is possible
to integrate heterogeneous chips with higher bandwidth memory (HBM), or higher transmission speeds, or other
specific-function chips to push overall performance. To do this, the ultimate in heterogeneous chip integration
packaging technology will play an essential role.
This article introduces packaging technology platforms developed by Amkor including: 2.5D Through Silicon
Via (TSV) interposer, Chip on Substrate (CoS), Chip on Wafer (CoW) and High-Density Fan-Out (HDFO) as well as
developed electronic design automation (EDA) design flow and test solutions. To achieve mass production capability
for these advanced packages, the article will also discuss the most advanced, highly-automated outsourced
semiconductor assembly and test (OSAT) production factory: Amkor Technology Korea – K5. K5 with its high
technology and top quality helps customers achieve their high-speed performance goals.

1. Introduction
What are some of today’s most remarkable and popular
advanced technologies? There is a high probability that
industry experts will cite one or more the following terms:
artificial intelligence, deep learning, cloud computing,
super computers and autonomous driving. These cuttingedge technologies are leading the way for incredible
advancements. Moreover, they all have a common
characteristic: high-speed, high performance ICs.
Looking at the world’s technology giants, such as Google,
Amazon, Intel, Nvidia and AMD, they all invest greatly
in resource development. In China, artificial intelligence
has already been incorporated into the nation’s top-level
planning. In 2016, the “13th Five-Year National Science and
Technology Innovation Plan” promulgated by the State
Council specified this as an objective: “By 2020, the overall
technology and application of artificial intelligence will be
brought up to speed with the advanced level of the rest of
the world. By 2025, artificial intelligence basic theory will
see major breakthroughs, and by 2030, artificial intelligence,
theory and application will lead the world.” At the same
time, Chinese technology giants such as Baidu, Alibaba,
Tencent, Huawei and others, will all expand by leaps and
bounds. Furthermore, many start-up companies, such as
Cambricon will have superior technology to invest in this

flourishing technology wave. Investment agency Goldman
Sachs Group has predicted that global AI hardware
microchips including central processing units (CPUs),
graphics processing units (GPUs), application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs), field-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) and others, will grow at an annual compound rate
of more than 40% in the coming years (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Worldwide AI computing hardware total available
market (TAM). Source: Goldman Sachs 2018

Originally published in China Integrated Circuits ▶ December 2018 ▶ © 2018 Amkor Technology, Inc.

1

The continuous advancements in algorithms, big data
and high-performance microchips are driving the giant
leap forward for this technology wave. Among these are
advanced high-speed microchips, which follow Moore’s law,
beginning with TSMC as the first to progress in advanced
manufacturing. Components are constantly shrinking to 16
nm/14 nm, 10 nm and 7 nm, with CMOS component speeds
continuously increasing, and increasing gate counts. This is
equivalent to integrating twice the number of components
in the same amount of space every 18-24 months. It is
truly astonishing. In addition to the increased speed of
the main chips themselves, two additional key elements
are trending. One is high bandwidth memory (HBM) to
increase computing power, lower total system power and
increase memory bandwidth – all at the same time. The
other is Serializer/Deserializer or SerDes for receiving and
transmitting high-speed information. SerDes IO blocks can
be integrated into the main chip or can be fabricated as
stand-alone chips. How can their high-speed performance
be integrated together? Advanced 2.5D heterogeneous
packaging technology fulfills this role.

2. 2.5D Package Summary
Why 2.5D Packaging?
Today, 2.5D packaging is an advanced IC package which
makes high speed integrations of different ICs possible.
Its main features include the three structures shown in
Figure 2:
(1) Integration of HBM and SerDes microchips using microbump joining to an interposer

The Benefits of 2.5D Packaging
There are several major reasons to make such a
complicated package structure. As shown in Figure 3, to
meet the demand for increased processing speeds, memory
location is trending towards closer and closer physical
proximity to the CPU. After each package is singulated,
it is mounted on the motherboard (printed circuit board
or PCB), which, in many high-level applications, leads to
System-in-Package (SiP) technology. For this packaging
methodology, the memory and main CPU are connected on
the substrate to form a FCBGA to progress towards the era
of 2.5D packaging. With the new generation of HBM DRAM,
the distance between logic and HBM has been minimized
to <100 µm by directly connecting both ICs to a silicon (Si)
interposer. The decreased distance means shorter time
delays, better electronic signal quality, better opportunities
for higher speeds and lower energy consumption.
Another reason is that extremely high HBM data bandwidth
is enabled using the silicon interposer approach, exceeding
that from DDR4 or GDDR5/GDDR5X/GDDR6. HBM achieves
this by using a much wider parallel bus than DDR4 or
the GDDR offerings, at 1024 bits. HBM and HBM2 have
approximately 4,000 input/output (I/O) and power
connections, which means that connecting with the main
chip requires a very high connection density. Traditional
FCBGA substrate line width limits are already unable to
satisfy this high-density connection and must be upgraded
from FCBGA to silicon wafers as the basis for the 2.5D Si
interposer connection.

(2) Through silicon via (TSV) interposer connections to C4 or
Large CuP
(3) Package substrate

Figure 3. Advanced packaging trends.

Figure 2. Three key elements of advanced 2.5D packaging
technology.

2

Another important trend is the SerDes for high-speed data
transmission. A single-channel SerDes can reach 10 gigabits
per second (Gbps), 28 Gbps, 56 Gbps and even up to 112
Gbps. During high-speed data center applications, the main
chip controls multiple SerDes channels. Along with the
advancements in the main CPU and GPU manufacturing,
SerDes design companies will also develop intellectual
property (IP) for new manufacturing processes and provide
microchip companies with designs that can be integrated
into the main chip. However, with the high-speed and
high-performance requirements, and comprehending the
fact that SerDes drivers to not scale well to new silicon
nodes, time to market pressures, and costs of new SerDes
IP validation, the market is not uniformly heading towards
integrated system on chip (SoC) designs.

Originally published in China Integrated Circuits ▶ December 2018 ▶ © 2018 Amkor Technology, Inc.

Some applications are now using package-level integration
of main chips with multiple SerDes chips, using 2.5D
heterogeneous packaging solutions.
There are also yield considerations. In theory, the larger the
surface area of a single microchip, the worse the yield. There
is a huge yield difference as shown by the Bose-Einstein
yield module: Y=1/(1+AD)^k, where Y represents yield, A
represents the microchip’s surface area, D represents defect
density, and k represents the difficulty layer factor. For a
product that is powerful enough to require a large surface
area, the predicted yield is low. However, during design, if
the required area is divided into multiple smaller chips, then
it achieves a higher yield and lower cost through the 2.5D
heterogeneous integration package. This has already been
demonstrated with FPGAs.

3. TSV Si Interposer
The high-speed microchip relies on TSV Si interposer
technology for high-density connections. The main reason is
that the TSV-bearing interposers can support signal routing
layers (RDL) can be smaller than 2 µm/2 µm and can support
a 40 µm micro bump. This means 10 times the density of an
FCBGA substrate. It provides a shorter connecting distance
and has better electronic signal quality, thereby achieving a
heterogeneous microchip integration connection.
Amkor’s TSV Si interposer is a wafer-level manufacturing
process. The process begins with a 300-mm TSV-bearing
wafer that is finished and received from the wafer foundry,
where it is subsequently thinned with TSVs etched and filled,
and finally given a protective layer on the back and solder
bumps before singulation. This series of steps is commonly
referred to as mid-end of line (MEOL) processing. The main
process forms a cross-section from the upper layer micro
bump connection pad to the lower layer FCBGA substrate
connection solder bump as shown in Figure 4:

4. Chip on Substrate (CoS) Packaging
After the Si interposer intermediate module is finished,
it is attached to the package substrate, and provides a
heterogeneous, 2.5D package. Amkor began developing
2.5D packaging in 2009, and in 2011, Xilinx released the
industry’s first 2.5D FPGA Vertext-V7, of which, Amkor was
one of the contributors. Amkor has already developed two
main 2.5D package platforms, one is chip on substrate (CoS)
and the other is chip on wafer (CoW). CoS was developed
and completed first, and in 2014, when qualification
was completed, mass production was initiated. The CoW
platform has a new upgraded structure manufacturing
process, and in 2018, it was officially mass produced.
The CoS manufacturing process first connects the
interposer to the substrate, and then it connects multiple
microchips to the interposer to form a heterogeneous
package (see Figure 5). Since the RDL is completed first in
the manufacturing process, and then the chips are attached
to the RDL interposer, the design has its own name –
called RDL first, or die last. The advantage of this design is
intermediate testing, where bad interposers or unfinished
products could be marked and not used in the package to
avoid losing valuable chips and attain a high yield. Packages
with larger dimensions present greater challenges. Amkor
has conducted much basic research in this field and has a
rich production database and has already completed mass
production for multiple products.

Figure 5. CoS processing.

Figure 4. Package cross section from front side (FS) pad to
backside (BS) C4.

Originally published in China Integrated Circuits ▶ December 2018 ▶ © 2018 Amkor Technology, Inc.

3

5. Chip on Wafer (CoW) Packaging

6. HDFO Packaging

CoW is the next generation of CoS and uses a silicon
wafer as the substrate to achieve a wafer-level package
technology. In comparison with CoS, CoW first combines the
chips to the interposer, adds wafer-level molding and finally,
they are connected to the flip chip (FC) substrate (see Figure
6). The benefits of this technology include a better physical
structure for accommodating very large die and larger
overall interposer dimensions. Amkor has completed testing
and is in mass production of this technology.

HDFO packaging is the next step of integrated FCBGA
technology for wafer-level packages without using TSV
technology. To achieve this goal, microchips are attached
and interconnected using µbump solder joints to a multilayer, fine-line RDL and BGAs to form an intermediate
assembly, and then connected to the FCBGA substrate to
complete the heterogeneous package (see Figure 7). This
technology maintains high line density, good electronic
signal quality, eliminates TSVs, and further lowers costs.
The HDFO heterogeneous package is being used
successfully in a variety of applications including networking
and servers as well as in a variety of GPU and FPGA
structures.

(a)

Figure 5. CoS processing.

(b)
Figure 7. HDFO packaging interconnects die (a) and then
attaches the intermediate assembly to the substrate (b).

4

Originally published in China Integrated Circuits ▶ December 2018 ▶ © 2018 Amkor Technology, Inc.

7. Testing
Sophisticated testing is an essential part of advanced,
complex and expensive heterogeneous packaging
integration. From chip probe (CP), interposer probe testing,
mid-test, final test (FT) and all the way to System-Level Test
(SLT), there are no shortages of difficulties and challenges.
These tests are all customized, and different products
for different customers may have their own respective
optimized process flows (see Figure 8).

Figure 9. Eye diagram showing the performance of
co-packaged CPU and HBM2.

Figure 8. Overall test flow for advanced packages.

8. Co-Design and Ecosystem
For the 2.5D package design plan, the design flow and
design methodology are very different from traditional
package designs. For example, an HBM2 DRAM has 4,000
bumps, a main chip may have tens of thousands of bumps,
and multiple chips are connected through an interposer.
To do this, the design, simulation for optimization and
rule-checking need to be advanced. Addressing these
challenges, Amkor has already developed OSAT industryleading Process Assembly Design Kits (PADKs) and a
design flow, to achieve electronic design automation (EDA)
connectivity with Cadence and Mentor Graphics.

In addition to design, the complete ecosystem is an
important part of advanced packages. Amkor has three
cooperative Si interposer foundries, forming an ecosystem
with the design company, design service company, IP
company and system company, as well as upstream and
downstream customers and manufacturers to optimize
resources and create a win-win scenario. There are many
success examples of joint development and joint releases
based on this concept. These include:
ff 2014: Open-Silicon/GLOBALFOUNDRIES/Amkor, jointly
released 2.5D TSV achieving multi SiP functionality
ff 2016: SK Hynix/eSilicon/Northwest Logic/Amkor/ Avery,
jointly released “High-Bandwidth Memory White Paper:
Start your HBM/2.5D Design Today”
ff 2018: Samsung/eSilicon/Northwest Logic/ Amkor, jointly
held conference to discuss “ASIC Unlock Deep Learning
Innovation. Webinar: HBM2/2.5D Ecosystem for AI”

The kits are introduced during the design stage to achieve
a synchronous debugging design environment, to carry
out comparisons between schematic and layout diagrams
and to perform all Design Rule Checks (DRCs). This process
achieves rigorous design verification and sign off. In
addition, by extracting the design, interposer and substrate
models, and implementing co-design and co-simulation,
Design for Performance (DFP), Design for Cost (DFC) and
Design for Manufacturing (DFM) are also achieved. Figure
9 shows one example of a simulated eye diagram while the
main chip and HBM2 are operating at a 2 GHz frequency.

Originally published in China Integrated Circuits ▶ December 2018 ▶ © 2018 Amkor Technology, Inc.

5

9. Production Capacity

10. Summary

For advanced semiconductor packages, research and
development capabilities alone are inadequate – stable
and controllable production capacity are also required.
As a pioneer in this area, Amkor has established a stateof-the-art manufacturing facility in Incheon, South Korea
called K5. This is a clean wafer plant-grade (class 100)
modern factory that can be used for producing wafer-level
packages that includes automated guide vehicles (AGVs) and
Advanced Planning and Scheduling (APS) (see Figure 10).
These AGVs are controlled via APS and are able to self-drive
to corresponding warehouse locations, load commodities,
transport the commodities to corresponding platforms
and choose the correct platform work recipe. This kind of
automation greatly decreases the risk of human errors
and mis-operations. Moreover, the manufacturing process
parameters and measurement data are collected and stored
in big data centers. This type of big data management and
big data analysis has excellent traceability and is able to
avoid the blind spots of traditional human engineering
operations and human management. Undoubtedly, this
advanced factory warehouse has received important
positive reviews from customers and others.

In the current wave of technological evolution, meeting
the performance requirements of AI, deep learning, cloud
computing and super computers requires heterogeneous
packaging for high-speed microchips, as well as their
corresponding HBM and ultra-high-speed SerDes ICs. Amkor
meets these requirements with a variety of heterogeneous
packaging technologies. These include 2.5D Si interposer,
CoS, CoW, HDFO and other heterogeneous packaging
technologies with optimized design process flows and
testing solutions, and the most advanced and automated
factories to help customers around the world achieve
success.
References
Amkor Technology, Inc.: https://amkor.com/technology/
Thank You
The authors extend thanks to Ron Huemoeller, Curtis
Zwenger, Ruben Fuentes and Debi Polo at Amkor
Technology, Inc. and Emdrem Tan, Jack Chen, Kevin Yu,
Jason Kao, Michael Chang, Elbert Liu, Annie Huang and
Sophia Huang in the Amkor Greater China area marketing
and sales department.
About the Authors
John Lee currently serves in the marketing and sales
department of Amkor Greater China.

Figure 10. Automated guide vehicles move product at various
stages in the state-of-the art K5 manufacturing facility.

Mike Kelly is Vice President of Advanced Product
Development at Amkor Technology. He holds a Master of
Science degree in Chemical Engineering from the University
of Idaho and a Master of Science degree in Mechanical
Engineering from the University of Washington.
Key words: 2.5D, TSV, Interposer, CoS, CoW, HDFO,
Heterogeneous Package, Amkor

6

Originally published in China Integrated Circuits ▶ December 2018 ▶ © 2018 Amkor Technology, Inc.

