                                                                                                         Nanosystems and
                                                                                                         Technologies
                                                                                                         GmbH

                                                                                                         nanoplus
                   DFB Laser Concept
TECHNICAL
                   LD, ICL, QCL
NOTES

ESD Precautions    Distributed feedback lasers (DFB) provide longitudinal and transverse single-mode
                   emission at a precise wavelength with a narrow linewidth. In comparison to distributed
Thermal            Bragg reflectors or VCSELs, they guarantee high output power and large mode-hop-free
Management
                   tunability. Thus, DFB lasers perfectly meet the high standards of gas sensing applications
                   based on tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy (TDLAS).
DFB Laser
Concept            This technical note introduces the unique nanoplus DFB laser technology in Laser Diodes
                   (LD), Interband Cascade Lasers (ICL) and Quantum Cascade Lasers (QCL).
Tunable Diode
Laser Absorption
Spectroscopy
                       Key features:
Reliability
                       _ 	MONOMODE
                       _ 	CONTINUOUS WAVE
                       _ 	ROOM TEMPERATURE
                       _ 	MODE HOP FREE TUNING
                                                                                                        DFB laser with spectrum

                                                                     The nanoplus DFB laser concept (see schema-
                                                                     tic) is based on an overgrowth-free etching
                                                                     process.

                                                                     In nanoplus DFB lasers, the complex coupling
                                                                     is achieved by combining a ridge waveguide
                                                                     structure with metal gratings on top of the
                                                                     waveguide layer on both sides of the laser
                                                                     ridge.
                      Schematic of nanoplus DFB laser
                                                                 This high-precision process is carried out using
                       electron beam lithography and allows the emission wavelength of the resulting DFB laser to
                       be defined down to the nanometer range. In this way, the lasers can be precisely specified
                       for their spectroscopic task.


                       Compared to other production
                       technologies, the nanoplus            "High-precision single mode lasers
                       concept eliminates high-grade          for ultra fine measurements.”
                       orientation-independent growth
                       or patterning-related defects
                       near the active layer.

                       This patented manufacturing system offers many further
                       advantages. It can be transferred to any material system
                       such as GaAs, InP and GaSb, ICL, QCL (wide wavelength
                       range), is easily customizable (short time-to-market)
                       and achieves high yields (cost-effective production of
                       large quantities).

                       nanoplus uses this technology to manufacture laser sources
                       for gas sensor applications in the visible, near infrared (NIR)
                       and mid infrared (MIR) wavelength ranges. The devices are
                       available at any customized wavelength between 760 nm
                       and 14000 nm.
                                                                                                                    nanoplus laser in
                                                                                                                    butterfly package with
                                                                                                                    single mode fiber
                     Distributed Feedback Lasers:
                     760 nm - 14000 nm
                     With its unique production technology nanoplus designs three types of laser structures
                     covering the nearly visible, NIR and MIR wavelength regions:
                     Bipolar Laser Diodes, Interband Cascade Lasers, Quantum Cascade Lasers.




                                             Typical cw spectrum of a nanoplus DFB laser                                                      Typical mode-hop-free tuning of a nanoplus
                                                         at room temperature                                                                     DFB laser by current and temperature


                                   Bipolar Laser Diodes                                       Interband Cascade Lasers                                       Quantum Cascade Lasers
                                    760 nm - 2900 nm                                             2800 nm - 6500 nm                                            6000 nm - 14000 nm

                                                                                                                                                   Electrons and holes recombine optically
                      At the p-n junction of a semiconductor                         At the W-shaped quantum well of
                                                                                                                                                   within the conduction band of the
                      diode, there is an optical interband                           the semiconductor material, an optical
                                                                                                                                                   semiconductor material (intraband).
                      recombination of electrons and holes.                          interband recombination of electrons
                                                                                                                                                   The valence band is irrelevant for the
                      This transition has a high energy gap.                         and holes occurs. The energy of this
                                                                                                                                                   optical transition. The energy of this
                      For this reason, we achieve a shorter                          transition is between that of an LD and
                                                                                                                                                   transition is low. For this reason, we
                      wavelength range with these devices.                           a QCL. For this reason, we achieve a
                                                                                                                                                   achieve a wider wavelength range with
                                                                                     medium wavelength range with these
                                                                                                                                                   these devices.
                                                                                     devices.




 Rev.DFBConcept.01
Rev.DFBConcept.01
                                        Structure LD                                                 Structure ICL                                                  Structure QCL

                     Please check our literature on our website: nanoplus.com/literature.


                     Further technical notes
                     ESD precautions: How to avoid ESD damage to your laser.
                     Thermal management: How to maximize temperature stability to optimize laser performance.

                     Technical notes: nanoplus.com/downloads
                     Please contact sales@nanoplus.com for customized specifications, quotes and further questions.
                     nanoplus Nanosystems and Technologies GmbH, www.nanoplus.com, phone: +49 (0) 3693 50 5000-0, email: sales@nanoplus.com                                nanoplus.com
                     ©
                       copyright nanoplus Nanosystems and Technologies GmbH 2023, all rights reserved. Technical data is subject to change without notice.
