Multi-Section InP-on-Silicon DFB Laser Diodes: Optimisations and Applications

InP-op-silicium DFB-laserdiodes met meerdere secties: optimalisaties en toepassingen

Mahmoud Shahin




                                    Promotoren: prof. dr. ir. G. Morthier, prof. dr. ir. G. Roelkens
                                      Proefschrift ingediend tot het behalen van de graad van
                                             Doctor in de ingenieurswetenschappen: fotonica

                                                              Vakgroep Informatietechnologie
                                                               Voorzitter: prof. dr. ir. B. Dhoedt
                                           Faculteit Ingenieurswetenschappen en Architectuur
                                                                    Academiejaar 2019 - 2020
ISBN 978-94-6355-335-3
NUR 950
Wettelijk depot: D/2020/10.500/12
                                                         Universiteit Gent
                        Faculteit Ingenieurswetenschappen en Architectuur
                                           Vakgroep Informatietechnologie




Promotoren:
prof. dr. ir. Geert Morthier
prof. dr. ir. Günther Roelkens




Examencommissie:
prof. dr. ir. Filip De Turck (voorzitter)                  Universiteit Gent
prof. dr. ir. Geert Morthier (promotor)                    Universiteit Gent
prof. dr. ir. Günther Roelkens (promotor)                  Universiteit Gent
prof. dr. ir. Dries Van Thourhout (secretaris)             Universiteit Gent
prof. dr. ir. Xin Yin                                      Universiteit Gent
prof. dr. ir. Geert Van Steenberge                         Universiteit Gent
prof. dr. ir. Guy Verschaffelt                      Vrije Universiteit Brussel
prof. dr. ir. Jos van der Tol              Technische Universiteit Eindhoven




Universiteit Gent
Faculteit Ingenieurswetenschappen en Architectuur

Vakgroep Informatietechnologie
Technologiepark Zwijnaarde 126, 9052 Gent, België




                             Proefschrift tot het behalen van de graad van
                           Doctor in de ingenieurswetenschappen: fotonica
                                                   Academiejaar 2019-2020
                                 Acknowledgment
This four-year-long PhD was such a unique and crazy adventure. That is right,
crazy is my way of describing it. Aside from gaining significant knowledge
about photonics, I learned a great deal about life as well, from everyone I
met in and out of the photonics research group of Ghent University. I have
had many interesting discussions over lunch or coffee, which brought yet
another dimension to the way I view the world as an individual. I met a
collection of people with unique personalities and talents, and among those,
I made many life-time friends.

     As you might expect, I will start by acknowledging my professors. The
guidance of my professors was crucial for the success of this work. I had the
pleasure of working with two world-renowned researchers in their fields. My
main supervisor, Geert, was always available for consultation, and we
worked together as a team. We have exchanged more than a thousand and
five hundred emails and probably met more than a hundred times to discuss
our progress. His support and contribution from my first days as a novice
researcher until my thesis defense are crystal clear. I did not exchange as
many emails or met as many times with my co-supervisor, Gunther, because
that would have been crazy. However, his suggestions were always useful,
and his feedback for all the manuscripts we wrote was critical for the quality
of the final output. Thank you both for supporting and believing in me. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the jury members of this thesis for
providing valuable comments to improve the manuscript.

      I would like to extend a word of gratitude for other researchers in the
photonics research group, who in one way or another have positively
influenced my progress. I would like to mention a few of them here. In the
first period of my PhD, I obtained many skills and learned many techniques
on laser processing and characterization by closely following Amin. I also
received a lot of support from other researchers working on III-V/Si. Sören
offered his advice on several occasions, as well as my colleagues Jing and
Sulakshna, and others who patiently responded to my many questions in and
out of the cleanroom.




                                      i
ii                                                   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


     Additionally, I would like to acknowledge the support of the cleanroom
staff, who were always ready to assist. Steven was always eager to demystify
the different sophisticated systems in the cleanroom, while Muhammad
showed me many practical fabrication tips that proved indispensable in the
fabrication of laser devices. Finally, Liesbet helped me several times with the
use and interpretation of SEM/FIB measurements. It remains a mystery how
many Acetone-IPA bottles did I fill during my time in the cleanroom.

     I would also like to acknowledge the efforts of other technical and
administrative staff in the group, Ilse, Kristien, and Jasper. Furthermore, I
received ample support from the IDLab team, mainly from Joris VKB, during
my complex high-speed modulation experiments. Last but not least, I worked
for one year side by side with my colleague Ma Keqi on self-pulsation lasers
during what was possibly the most enjoyable period of my PhD journey. Also,
I would like to share a word of gratitude for all other collaborators and
researchers who are not mentioned here for their support and
encouragement.

     I spent the funniest moments with my office mates, Xiaomin, thank you
for lending me your nail clipper every day. I bet many readers already know
the story behind that. Seriously now, I had many nice conversations with you.
Irfan, thanks to you, I discovered a new dimension of humor. Nicolas, though
we did not spend a lot of time together, I enjoyed all of our high-speed
modulation experiments (i.e. agario). For once, please come to the office,
and hopefully to my reception too. Sören, thank you for your whiteboard
workshops, language tips, and funny stories! Thank you Haolan and Luis for
being part of my experience!

    I bet you are waiting to read your name among these lines. Please don’t
be disappointed if it wasn’t there. You are special to me in some way if you
are reading this. Anyway, I would like to mention a few more people who
made a difference to me as a person. Kristof is the friendliest and funniest
Belgian man I have ever met. I was also happy to meet the most original
person Nuria. It’s also cool to click with some unexpectedly crazy people like
Anita. Since I am talking about people who made a difference to my PhD
experience, I need to mention Javad, who provided me with a lot of support
and helped in many ways during the last part of my PhD. He is one proper
gentleman. I could spend hours discussing random stuff with Saurav, the
most entertaining person in the group. Oh, sorry, is that in the trailer too?

    Friday evenings weren’t going to be as good without my best friends. I
consider myself lucky to have made some lifetime friends here. I had the time
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT                                                                            iii


of my life with Alejandro and Sanja. It goes far beyond this text to describe
this triangle, and given that I don’t have space, I simply won’t. I also had the
most thought-provoking conversations with Alessio and the best arguments
with Margherita. You guys are impossible to forget. Speaking about best
times, I had the best coffee breaks with the one and only of a kind Nina.
Needless to say, I had the strangest yet most enjoyable conversations with
Alexandros. It was interesting to view life from your perspective, and you
know what I’m talking about. I can’t forget Andrew with whom we spent the
best time in the middle of the African jungles, but also in the middle of the
Belgian bars (that does sound kind of alcoholic though).

    I got married during these four years, and my wife was the best thing
that ever happened to me. Savvinaki-mou is my lucky charm and the secret
to my happiness. Therefore, I would like to dedicate this work to her.
Σ'αγαπώ. I also would like to acknowledge my parents-in-law, Giorgos and
Daisy for their support, and to my brothers- and sister-in-law Panagiotis,
Stamatis, and Iw.

      Before finishing, I would like to still acknowledge the support of a few
more people: Abdul, Anatoly, Banafsheh, Clemens, Daria, Joanna, Jeroen,
Mia, Nesreen, Omar, and Tanja. If I forgot to mention someone, it’s because
I found this the most difficult part to write. I probably need another book
telling the many stories behind my PhD. So if you are part of the story, and
especially if you are reading this during my PhD presentation, then you
probably need to pay more attention to the presentation? Nonetheless, I
would like to thank you for all the support and contribution, no matter how
small it was. Some people just smiled at me at the kitchen, which was
sometimes enough to cheer me up. As for my family, I received a great deal
of support from them, but I would rather acknowledge them in the Arabic
script below.
‫ أدامكم‬.‫هذا الكتاب اهداء مع جزيل الشكر واالمتنان لوالدي الغاليان مروان وفادية لدعمهم الالمحدود‬
,‫ الشكر كذلك لعائلتي الممتدة‬.‫ كما واتوجه بالشكر ألختي هدى وإلخوتي محمد وراشد‬.‫هللا ذخرا ً لنا‬
‫ وجميع من كان له األثر‬,‫االعمام والعمات واالخوال والخاالت وابنائهم وبناتهم واألجداد والجدات‬
‫ ربما يأتي يوم‬,‫ هذا الكتاب اهداء ايضا ً للصغار تاليا ومروان‬.‫اإليجابي علي من عائلتي واصدقائي‬
                 .‫وتقرؤون هذه الكلمات وتكون لها األثر اإليجابي عليكم لنرى منكم عظماء المستقبل‬

December 2019, Ghent                                                     ‫ غنت‬،2019 ‫ديسمبر‬
Mahmoud Shahin                                                                ‫محمود شاهين‬
                             Table of Contents

Acknowledgement                                                    i

Table of contents                                                 v

List of Acronyms                                                  ix

Nederlandse Samenvatting                                         xv

English Summary                                                 xxi

1 Introduction                                                     1
   1.1 Optical interconnects ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 1
   1.2 Silicon photonics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 4
   1.3 Heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon integration ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 6
       1.3.1 Integration techniques ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 7
       1.3.2 Adhesive bonding ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 8
   1.4 Modulation schemes and techniques ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 8
       1.4.1 Modulation schemes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 9
       1.4.2 Direct versus external modulation techniques ⋅ 10
   1.5 Attribution of work ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 11
   1.6 Outline ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 12
   1.7 List of publications ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 13
       1.7.1 International peer-reviewed journals ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 13
       1.7.2 International conferences ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 14
   References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 15

2 Overview of DFB laser diodes                                   19
  2.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 19
  2.2 Introduction to lasers ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 20



                                 v
vi


     2.3 Introduction to laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 21
          2.3.1 Spontaneous and stimulated emission ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 21
          2.3.2 Direct and indirect band structures ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 22
          2.3.3 PN-junction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 24
          2.3.4 Bulk versus multi-quantum-wells ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 26
          2.3.5 Multi-quantum-wells for 1.3/1.55 μm ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 27
     2.4 DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 29
          2.4.1 Fabry-Perot laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 29
          2.4.2 DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 30
     2.5 III-V-on-silicon laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 32
     2.6 Monolithic versus heterogeneous III-V-on-Si devices ⋅ 33
          2.6.1 Index contrast and optical confinement ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 33
          2.6.2 Grating coupling efficiency ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 34
          2.6.3 Thermal challenges ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 35
     2.7 Fabrication of III-V-on-silicon DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 36
          2.7.1 Process flow ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 36
          2.7.2 Optical design, fabrication and issues ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 40
     2.8 III-V epitaxial layer structures used in this work ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 43
     2.9 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 47
     References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 47

3 Two-section DFB laser diodes                                    51
  3.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 51
  3.2 Self-pulsating DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 52
       3.2.1 Literature review and state-of-the-art ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 53
       3.2.2 Design ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 55
       3.2.3 Static laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 57
       3.2.4 Unlocked Self-pulsation characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 60
       3.2.5 Locking the self-pulsation to an RF signal ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 63
  3.3 Bandwidth-enhanced DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 64
       3.3.1 Literature review and state-of-the-art ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 65
       3.3.2 Design ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 67
       3.3.3 Static laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 67
       3.3.4 Dynamic laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 68
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                vii


  3.4 Power-efficient DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 72
      3.4.1 Literature review and state-of-the-art ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 73
      3.4.2 Design ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 75
      3.4.3 Static laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 76
      3.4.4 Dynamic laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 78
  3.5 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 81
  References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 85

4 Electro-absorption modulated DFB laser diodes                   89
  4.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 89
  4.2 Literature review and state-of-the-art ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 90
  4.3 Design ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 93
  4.4 Characterization ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 96
       4.4.1 Static laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 96
       4.4.2 Small signal modulation ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 98
       4.4.3 Large signal modulation ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 100
  4.5 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 103
  References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 104

5 Compact DFB laser diode                                        107
  5.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 107
  5.2 Design and fabrication ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 108
  5.3 Static laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 111
  5.4 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 113
  References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 113

6 Conclusion and prospects                                      115
  6.1 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 115
  6.2 Prospects ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 116
  References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 117
            List of Acronyms


A
AlSb             Aluminum-Antimony
AR               Anti-Reflective
Au               Aurum (Gold)
AWG              Arbitrary Waveform
Generator



B
BER              Bit Error Rate
BHF              Buffered Hydrofluoric acid



C
CdO              Cadmium-Oxide
CW               Continuous-Wave




            ix
x


D
DBR                     Distributed Bragg
Reflector
DC                      Direct Current
DFB                     Distributed Feedback
DR                      Distributed Reflector
DSF                     Dispersion Shifted Fiber
DVS-BCB                 Divinylsiloxane-Bis-
Benzocyclobutene
DWDM                    Dense Wavelength
Division Multiplexing


E
EAM                     Electro-Absorption
Modulation
EDFA                    Erbium-Doped-Fiber-
Amplifier
EML                     Externally-Modulated
Laser
EOM                     Electro-Optic Modulators
ESA                     Electrical Spectrum
Analyzer



F
FDTD                    Finite-Difference Time-
Domain
LIST OF ACRONYMS                             xi


FDTW               Finite-Difference
Travelling-Wave
FEC                Forward Error Correction
FIB                Focused Ion Beam
FSR                Free Spectral Range



G
GaInNAs            Gallium-Indium-Nitride-
Arsenide
Ge                 Germanium
GaAs               Gallium-Arsenide
GS                 Ground-Signal
GSG                Ground-Signal-Ground



H
H2O                Dihydrogen Monoxide
(Water)
H2O2               Hydrogen Peroxide
H2SO4              Sulphuric acid
HCl                Hydrochloric acid
HD                 Hard Decision
HeNe               Helium-Neon
xii


I
ICP                     Inductively Coupled
Plasma
IEEE                    Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
InP                     Indium-Phosphide
InGaAsP                 Indium-Gallium-Arsenide-
Phosphide
InAlGaAs                Indium-Gallium-
Aluminum-Arsenide



L
LED                     Light-Emitting Diode



M
MZM                     Mach-Zehnder Modulator
MQW                     Multi Quantum Well



N
NRZ-OOK                 Non-Return-to-Zero On-
Off-Keying
Ni                      Nickel
LIST OF ACRONYMS                                xiii


NZ-DSF                 Non-Zero Dispersion-
Shifted Fiber



P
PAM-4                  Four-level Pulse
Amplitude Modulation
PPR                    Photon-Photon
Resonance
PRBS                   Pseudorandom Binary
Sequence




Q
QAM                    Quadrature Amplitude
Modulation
QPSK                   Quadrature Phase-Shift
Keying



R
RIE                    Reactive Ion Etching
RF                     Radio Frequency
xiv


S
SCH               Separate Confinement
Heterostructure
SOI               Silicon-On-Insulator
SOA               Semiconductor Optical
Amplifier
Si                Silicon
SMSR              Side-Mode Suppression-
Ratio
SiN               Silicon Nitride
SEM               Scanning Electron
Microscope



V
VCSEL             Vertical-Cavity Surface-
Emitting Laser
VNA               Vector Network Analyzer



W
WDM               Wavelength-Division
Multiplexing



Z
ZnO               Zinc-Oxide
          Nederlandse Samenvatting


De voorbije twee decennia hebben we een ongeziene groei gekend van de
vraag naar telecommunicatie, iets waartoe vroeger enkel een elite toegang
had.Oorspronkelijk werden koperkabels gebruikt voor telecommunicatie.
Deze werden echter snel vervangen door optische vezels, die een veel grotere
bandbreedte toelaten en veel lagere propagatieverliezen hebben. Optische
vezels worden nu vooral gebruikt voor lange-afstandscommunicatie (vanaf
enkele tientallen km), maar ze worden alsmaar meer ook voor kortere
afstanden (enkele honderden meters) overwogen. Wetenschappers hopen dat
optische interconnecties ooit zelfs op chipschaal zullen gebruikt worden, maar
dit blijft een grote uitdaging.
   Optische interconnecties in datacenters zijn een goed voorbeeld van korte-
afstandscommunicatie. Bedrijven zoals Facebook en Google moeten heel wat
data verwerken in hun datacenters. Dit vereist communicatie aan hoge
snelheid tussen de servers, gebruikmakend van hoge-snelheidslaserdiodes,
modulatoren en fotodetectoren. Geaggregeerde datadebieten tot 800 Gbit/s of
1.6 Tbit/s per transceiver worden verwacht de standaard te worden in de nabije
toekomst. Naast de bandbreedtevereisten, dienen de optische-
transmissiesystemen ook een zo laag mogelijk energieverbruik te hebben.
   Dit werk richt zich op het verbeteren van de performantie van de
laserdiodes, één van de belangrijkste componenten in elk optisch
communicatiesysteem en dus ook van de optische interconnecties in
datacenters. Het doel is om compacte laserdiodes te demonsteren met hoge
modulatiebandbreedte en laag vermogenverbruik.
  Momenteel is er heel wat interesse in siliciumfotonica, o.a. voor de realisatie
van fotonisch geintegreerde circuiten met dewelke diverse functies kunnen
uitgevoerd worden. De mogelijkheid van volumeproductie aan lage kostprijs
maakt dit platform heel aantrekkelijk. Siliciumfotonica biedt tevens de
mogelijkheid tot heel dichte integratie, alsmede om de volwassen
fabricatietechnologie van de CMOS-elektronica te gebruiken.




                                       xv
xvi


   Aan de andere kant heeft silicium evenwel het nadeel dat het niet geschikt
is voor de realisatie van lichtbronnen, door zijn indirecte bandstructuur.
Daarom moet het gecombineerd worden met III-V epitaxiale lagen. Dit kan
op verschillende manieren, zoals flip-chip integratie, hetero-epitaxie en
heterogene integratie (op basis van een soort hechting). Het III-V-op-silicium
combineert de eerder vermelde voordelen van silicium met efficiente
lichtbronnen in het III-V-membraan. De methode die in dit doctoraat gebruikt
wordt voor de heterogene integratie van III-V membranen op silicium
golfgeleiders is adhesieve hechting, en een SEM-foto van de doorsnede van
de resulterende laser diode wordt gegeven in Fig. 1.




Figure 1: SEM-afbeelding van de doorsnede van een gefabriceerde III-V-op-silicium
laserdiode.

   De laser die we gekozen hebben om de verschillende doeleinden te
verwezenlijken is de DFB (distributed feedback) laserdiode. Het is de
lichtbron die reeds lang de voorkeur geniet voor optische communicatie,
vanwege de stabiele monomodale werking en de hoge zijmode-
onderdrukking. De lasers die in dit werk gedemonstreerd worden zijn: (1) zelf-
pulserende lasers, (2) bandbreedteverhoogde lasers, (3) lasers met lage
drempelstroom, (4) electro-absorptie-gemoduleerde lasers, en (5) compacte
lasers.

De zelf-pulserende DFB laserdiode
De component die het eerst gedemonstreerd wordt in dit werk is de zelf-
pulserende DFB laserdiode. De laser bestaat uit twee secties die van een
verschillende stroom worden voorzien. Dit resulteert in twee laserlijnen
waardoor de totale intensiteit op periodieke manier in de tijd varieert met de
verschilfrequentie. Afstembare, hoge repetitiefrequenties kunnen op die
manier bekomen worden, zoals te zien is in Fig. 2. Deze component kan
gebruikt worden voor de generatie van optische microgolfdragers, welke op
hun beurt nuttig zijn in radio-over-vezel-toepassingen.
NEDERLANDSE SAMENVATTING                                                        xvii




Figure 2: RF spectra van een zelf-pulserende laser met repetitiefrequenties van 12.5,
24.5 en 39 GHz.




  (a)




  (b)


Figure 3: Een tweede resonantiepiek verschijnt in het modulatie-antwoord tengevolge
van de excitatie van een zijmode (a). Dit leidt tot een hoge modulatiebandbreedte en
snelheid, zoals te zien in het oogdiagram voor 45 Gb/s modulatie in (b).

De bandbreedteverhoogde DFB laser diode
Gebruikmakend van een soortgelijke structuur als bij de zelf-pulserende
lasers, demonstreren we DFB lasers met verhoogde bandbreedte. Indien de
twee lasersecties van een iets andere dc-stroom voorzien worden, verschijnt
in het modulatie-antwoord een tweede piek, bovenop de resonantiepiek van
de relaxatie-oscillaties. Dit is te zien in Fig. 3 (a), die het modulatie-antwoord
toont als functie van de modulatiefrequentie. De tweede piek verhoogt de
modulatiebandbreedte, en laat modulatie bij hogere bitsnelheden toe, wanneer
één laser sectie wordt gemoduleerd. Voor het meten van het oogdiagram in
Fig. 3 (b) werd de laser gemoduleerd aan 45 Gbit/s.
xviii


Een DFB laserdiode met lage drempelstroom
Gebruikmakend van de in twee secties verdeelde laserdiode demonstreren we
ook DFB laserdiodes met lage drempelstroom. Daartoe wordt slechts één van
de twee lasersecties gebiased en wordt de andere lasersectie gebruikt als
reflector en voor de koeling. We rapporteren compacte lasers met een lage
drempelstroom (van 4.5 mA, zie Fig. 4) en derhalve laag energieverbruik,
terwijl een modulatiebandbreedte kan behouden blijven die gelijkaardig is aan
deze van de standaard laser met één ekele sectie.




Figure 4: Optisch vermogen versus geïnjecteerde stroom voor een DFB laserdiode met
een lage drempelstroom van 4.5 mA.

Electroabsorptie-gemoduleerde DFB laserdiodes
De volgende component is een electroabsorptie-gemoduleerde DFB laser, met
hoge modulatiebandbreedte. De taper die normaal gebruikt wordt om het licht
te koppelen tussen het III-V membraan en de silicium golfgeleider wordt hier
gebruikt voor de electroabsorptiemodulatie. We proberen de maximale
snelheid van de modulatie te verhogen door de modulator te verkleinen en zo
de capaciteit en de RC-constante te verkleinen. Dit wordt verwezenlijkt door
het splitsen van de taper in twee secties, en slechts de eerste sectie te gebruiken
als electroabsorptiemodulator. Gezien op die manier de oppervlakte van de
modulator gereduceerd wordt, leidt dit tot een toename van de
modulatiebandbreedte. Het oogdiagram in Fig. 5 illustreert de toegenomen
maximale bitrate bij dergelijke modulatie; het is voor datatransmissie aan 80
Gbit/s.
NEDERLANDSE SAMENVATTING                                                        xix




Figure 5: Oogdiagram voor datatransmissie aan 80 Gbit/s in een zgn. rug-aan-rug
configuratie.

Compacte DFB laserdiodes
De laatste component is een compacte DFB laserdiode. Hier is het doel om de
laser zo klein mogelijk te maken zodat ook zijn energieverbruik aanzienlijk
daalt. We stellen een nieuw ontwerp voor met een korte taper, waarvan de
koppelingsefficientie door middel van simulaties berekend wordt. Ook de
uitdagingen en beperkingen van de fabricatie worden besproken en tenslotte
worden ook de karakteristieken getoond van gefabriceerde componenten.


        (a)




                    (b)



                            III-V
                              Si

Figure 6: Traditioneel (lang) ontwerp gebruikt voor de taper (a) en in het doctoraat
voorgestelde kort taper ontwerp (b).
                                   English Summary


The past two decades have witnessed unprecedented growth and demand for
telecommunication, something that only the elite had access to in the past.
Originally, copper cables were used for telecommunication. These were
quickly replaced by optical fibers that have many advantages in terms of
bandwidth and loss. Optical fibers are used nowadays for long-distance
communication (a few tens of km), but are quickly being introduced also for
shorter distances (a few hundreds of meters). Although challenging, scientists
hope that optical interconnects can penetrate even to chip level
communication.
  Optical interconnects in data centers are a good example of short-reach
communication. Companies like Facebook and Google need to process a lot
of data in their data centers. This requires high-speed communication between
the servers, using high-speed lasers, modulators, and photodetectors.
Aggregate data rates from transceivers as high as 800 Gbps or 1.6 Tbps are
expected to become a standard soon. In addition to the bandwidth
requirements, these optical systems should have as low power consumption as
possible.
  This work focuses on improving the performance of laser diodes, an
important component of any optical communication system in data centers.
The focus is to demonstrate laser diodes with high modulation bandwidth,
small footprint, and low power consumption.
  Nowadays, there is a lot of interest in silicon photonics to create photonic
integrated circuits, in which many functionalities can be realized. Large
volume production at low cost makes this platform very attractive for
photonics applications. Silicon photonics also offers the possibility for dense
integration, as well as the opportunity to use the mature CMOS electronics
fabrication technology. On the other hand, silicon has the disadvantage of
being an inefficient light source, due to its indirect bandgap. Therefore it has
to be combined with III-V epitaxial layers. This can be done by various
techniques such a flip-chip integration, hetero-epitaxy and heterogeneous
integration. Integration of III-V on silicon combines the aforementioned


                                      xxi
xxii


advantages of silicon, as well as the advantage of III-V semiconductors as
efficient light sources. The method used in this work for the heterogeneous
integration of III-V membranes on silicon waveguides is adhesive bonding,
and a cross section of the resulting device is shown in Fig. 1.




Figure 1: SEM image of a cross-section of a fabricated III-V-on-silicon laser diode

  The distributed feedback laser diode is the laser of choice in our work to
demonstrate lasers for different purposes. It is also the preferred optical source
in optical communication due to its stable single-mode behavior, and high
side-mode suppression ratio. The lasers demonstrated throughout this work
are: (1) self-pulsating lasers, (2) bandwidth enhanced lasers, (3) low-threshold
lasers, (4) electro-absorption modulated lasers, and (5) compact lasers.

Self-pulsating DFB laser diode
The first demonstrated device in this work is the self-pulsating DFB laser
diode. The laser consists of two sections that are biased at different bias
currents, resulting in two beating laser lines. High and tunable repetition
frequencies were obtained, as shown by the RF spectra in Fig. 2. This device
can be used for the generation of an optical microwave carrier, which is suited
for radio-over-fiber applications.




Figure 2: RF spectra of a self-pulsating laser with repetition frequencies of 12.5, 24.5
and 39 GHz.
ENGLISH SUMMARY                                                                   xxiii




  (a)




  (b)



Figure 3: (a) Modulation response in which a second resonance peak appears due to
the beating between the two laser lines of the two sections. (b) Eye diagram at 45 Gbps
for the laser with modulation response given in (a).

Bandwidth-enhanced DFB laser diode
Using a configuration similar to the self-pulsating lasers, we demonstrate
bandwidth enhanced DFB lasers. By biasing the two laser sections at certain
bias currents, a second resonance peak appears in the modulation response, in
addition to the relaxation oscillation frequency peak, as shown in Fig. 3 (a).
This extends the modulation bandwidth, leading to higher modulation speed
when directly modulating one laser section, as shown by the eye diagram at
45 Gb/s in Fig. 3 (b).

Low-threshold DFB laser diode
Using the two-section configuration, we demonstrate low-threshold DFB laser
diodes. This is done by biasing only one of the two laser sections, and using
the second section as a reflector and heat sink. We report compact lasers with
low threshold current (Fig. 4) and therefore lower power consumption while
maintaining modulation bandwidths similar to those of the standard single-
section laser.
xxiv




Figure 4: Optical power vs. injected current for a low threshold current laser

Electro-absorption modulated DFB laser diode
The next device is an electro-absorption modulated DFB laser, with high
modulation bandwidth. The taper used to couple light from the III-V to the
silicon waveguide is used here for electro-absorption modulation. We aim to
improve the high-speed performance by shrinking the modulator to reduce the
capacitance and therefore the RC constant. This is done by separating the taper
structure into two sections and using one of them as an electro-absorption
modulator. Since the area of the modulator is reduced, the modulation
bandwidth increases. The data transmission experiment shows an
improvement in modulation speed as shown in Fig. 5.




Figure 5: Eye diagram for the data transmission at 80 Gbps in back-to-back
configuration

Compact DFB laser diode
The final device is a compact DFB laser diode. The aim is to shrink the laser
as much as possible, such that the power consumption is reduced. We propose
a new design for a short taper structure, and show its coupling efficiency
through simulations. The design of the proposed device, in comparison to the
previous one, is shown in Fig. 6 (a, b). This is followed by outlining the
fabrication challenges and limitations. Finally, the characteristics of the
fabricated device with different taper parameters are shown.
ENGLISH SUMMARY                                                                xxv


        (a)




                    (b)



                           III-V
                             Si

Figure 6: Previously used (long) taper design (a) and proposed (short) taper design
(b).
                                            1 Introduction
                                                                   1
Contents
        1.1 Optical interconnects ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 1
        1.2 Silicon photonics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 4
        1.3 Heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon integration ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 6
        1.4 Modulation schemes and techniques ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 8
        1.5 Attribution of work ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 11
        1.6 Outline ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 12
        1.7 List of publications ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 13
        References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 15


1.1      Optical interconnects
Today, we are living in a rapidly changing period of humanity. The demand for
better technologies to improve human life is exploding. Not so long ago, it was
only the elite that had access to a telegraph for telecommunication, which required
the knowledge of Morse code. Nowadays, almost everybody has access to
inexpensive means of communication, allowing video calls across the oceans. As
these technologies become part of our lives, it is no surprise that the amount of
data traffic has exploded.
  Until recently, telecommunication used copper cables. Nowadays, optical fibers
have replaced copper cables for long distance communication. This is because of
the many advantages, such as higher bandwidth, lower loss, and immunity to
electromagnetic interference.
  An example of short reach communication is the interconnection in data
centers, like the one in Fig. 1.1 [1]. Such data centers require interconnects on


                                        1
2                                                                           CHAPTER 1

length scales of a few kilometers. Companies that store and handle huge amounts
of data, such as Google or Facebook, need to spend billions of dollars to constantly
maintain and improve their data center infrastructure.




Figure 1.1: Data center requiring interconnects in length scales of a few kilometers (figure
from [1]).

   Most data centers are already using optical fibers for communication between
different servers, for their aforementioned advantages. There are a few parameters
that describe the performance and determine the quality of an optical system. For
example, the modulation bandwidth, which determines how much data can be sent
over an optical link, is one of the most important parameters in an optical system.
It is limited by the components in the system, such as the transmitter, the receiver,
and the fiber infrastructure. Other important parameters are the power
consumption and the footprint of these systems.




Figure 1.2: Roadmap showing how optical interconnects are replacing copper
interconnects over time (figure from [2]).
INTRODUCTION                                                                         3

  Scientists hope that in the future optical interconnects can replace copper-based
communication even on chip level. While this is not impossible, a lot of work still
needs to be done to achieve this. For the moment, work is ongoing to improve the
performance of the components on rack-to-rack and board-to-board level, as
indicated in Fig. 1.2 [2].
   The main wavelengths for optical communication in data centers are 850, 1310,
and 1550 nm. Each wavelength is useful for a specific application. The reason
why these wavelengths are chosen for optical communication is related to the loss
and dispersion of the optical mode in the fiber material (SiO2). On one hand, in
the 1550 nm window, the optical loss is the lowest, as shown in Fig. 1.3. When
light travels over long distances, this parameter becomes important. Therefore, for
long distance communication, 1550 nm is the wavelength of choice.




Figure 1.3: Optical loss in fibers for different wavelength windows, showing the lowest
losses for the 1550 nm window (figure from [3]).

   The 1310 nm window on the other hand is where normal single mode fibers
exhibit zero dispersion, as shown in Fig. 1.4. Dispersion in optical fibers results
in the spread of light pulses in time due to the different wavelengths traveling with
different phase velocities in the fiber. The effect of dispersion becomes significant
for long distances and high bitrates, when consecutive pulses can completely
overlap. The attenuation is however more than that of the 1550 nm window.
Therefore, this wavelength is preferred for short distances. It is also possible to
overcome the problem of dispersion in the 1550 nm window using dispersion
shifted fibers (DSFs). Such fibers can shift the zero-dispersion point from 1310
nm to the 1550 nm, as shown in Fig. 1.4.
  Finally, the 850 nm window is the wavelength range of choice for the operation
of multimode fiber optical communication, using light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
and vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) as light sources. Since
multi-mode fibers have larger core size, they can support more than one
propagation mode. This results in modal dispersion, a distortion mechanism that
occurs in multi-mode fibers due to the different propagation velocity of each
4                                                                           CHAPTER 1

mode. Therefore, the bandwidth-distance product limit is lower, compared to
single-mode fibers [4].




Figure 1.4: Dispersion in normal fibers versus that in dispersion shifted fibers, where the
zero dispersion point was shifted from the 1310 nm to the 1550 nm window.

  To push the modulation speed higher, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) proposes certain Ethernet standards for optical fiber
communication. Some important standards for single-mode fibers are
summarized in Table 1.1. The different signals are put on different wavelengths
and then multiplexed onto a single optical fiber. This is called wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM). Furthermore, data rates as high as 800 Gbps and 1.6 Tbps
are also expected to become IEEE standards after 2020 [5].

Table 1.1: Few IEEE Ethernet standards for single-mode fibers
                 Ethernet standard                       Rate          Distance
          IEEE 802.3bm (100GBASE-LR4)                4 × 25 Gbps        10 km
           IEEE 802.3bs (200GBASE-LR4)               4 × 50 Gbps        10 km
           IEEE 802.3bs (400GBASE-LR8)               8 × 50 Gbps        10 km

1.2       Silicon photonics
The invention of the pin photodiode [6] in 1963, and the proposal for the use of
optical fibers for communication in 1964 [7–8] were important for the future of
semiconductor lasers and optical fiber communication. Nowadays, optical data
communication in the wavelength range of 1550 nm has already replaced
traditional copper-based electrical communication for long distances. Therefore,
extensive research is going on for short reach, such as data communication within
data centers, or even on-chip optical communication. The transparency of silicon
in the wavelength windows of 1310 and 1550 nm makes it a good candidate for
efficient light guiding. To enable this, silicon photonics has been under extensive
investigation by many researchers for many years.
   The potential for high volume production at low cost makes this platform
attractive for commercial applications. On top of that, “the field of silicon
photonics offers the possibility of dense integration, and the opportunity to use
the well-developed CMOS electronics fabrication technology” [9].
INTRODUCTION                                                                      5

   Silicon can be excellent for light guiding on a chip [10] because it uses the
contrast of relatively high refractive index silicon (used as a waveguide core), and
relatively low refractive index silicon oxide (used as a waveguide cladding). A
silicon photonics chip typically consists of (1) a silicon substrate, (2) 1–3 μm of
silicon oxide, (3) 220–400 nm of silicon with a width of a few hundred nm, and
(4) a top cladding consisting of air or silicon oxide, as shown in Fig. 1.5. Since
the structure consists mainly of silicon on top of buried silicon oxide, it is also
referred to as silicon-on-insulator (SOI).




Figure 1.5: The layout of a typical silicon-on-insulator waveguide.




Figure 1.6: Microscopic image of a silicon photonics integrated circuit with many
functionalities (figure from [11]).

  Many passive and active functionalities can be realized on a grain-sized silicon
photonic integrated circuit, like the one in Fig. 1.6. [11]. Examples for passive
components include high-confinement low-loss waveguides and bends [12–13],
high-Q micro ring resonators [14], grating couplers [15], and compact arrayed
waveguide gratings [16]. Active components such as silicon-based micro ring
resonator modulators [17–18] and Mach-Zehnder modulators [19] were
demonstrated. Additionally, silicon-germanium-based electro-absorption
modulators [20–21] and photodetectors [22], were also demonstrated. Finally,
multi-channel wavelength division multiplexed micro ring modulators were
demonstrated [23].
6                                                                        CHAPTER 1

   Silicon however has some disadvantages. The main drawback of silicon lies in
its indirect bandgap. Generating a photon in a direct bandgap material, such as
some III-V semiconductors, simply requires a transition of an electron from the
conduction band to the valence band. However, in an indirect bandgap material,
such as silicon, this direct transition can only happen if it is accompanied by a
change of momentum (i.e. a phonon) [9]. Therefore, it is challenging to design a
complete chip with an efficient light source only using silicon. One method of
using the advantages of both silicon photonics as a low-cost platform, and III-V
semiconductors as efficient light sources, is heterogeneous integration. The
resulting device looks like the one in Fig. 1.7 [24]. This is discussed in more detail
in the next section.




Figure 1.7: (a) 3D and (b) top view of heterogeneously integrated III-V-on-silicon laser
diode (figure from [24]).


1.3      Heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon integration
As mentioned earlier, the potential of the silicon photonics platform is the high
volume production at low cost. But since silicon is not an efficient light source
due to its indirect bandgap [9], integration with a direct bandgap material is a
necessity. A possible approach is heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon integration,
where the light is first generated in the III-V waveguide, then couples down to the
silicon waveguide using 230 μm long adiabatic tapers on both ends, as shown in
Fig. 1.7 [24]. These tapers act as a semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA) if they
are pumped. In the following subsections, we will discuss a few heterogeneous
III-V-on-silicon integration techniques.
INTRODUCTION                                                                           7


1.3.1 Integration techniques
There are several methods to achieve the integration of III-V semiconductors on
silicon, such as flip-chip integration [25], hetero-epitaxial growth [26], bonding
[27], and transfer printing [28]. Flip chip is advantageous because the devices can
be fabricated on their native substrate. However, the integration technique is time-
consuming and labour-hungry, since individual devices need to be aligned and
placed with sub-micron precision. Hetero-epitaxial growth, as the name indicates,
is based on growing an epitaxial layer structure of certain materials of interest on
silicon. While this allows high-density integration, this technique is hindered by,
amongst other things, the lattice mismatch between the epitaxial material and
silicon. Bonding solves the problem of lattice mismatch by growing the epitaxial
layer structure separately and integrating it at a later stage epi-side-down on top
of the SOI die or wafer.




Figure 1.8: The used area of a bonded III-V die is around 30% of the total die area.

   The drawback of bonding is not technical; it lies in the inefficient use of costly
III-V materials. Fig. 1.8 shows the used area of a III-V die with a typical size of 5
mm × 7 mm, which is around 30%. Since the devices will be processed after die
bonding, some space should be left free for metal pads, as well as on the edges to
keep the devices safe. Since the price of a two-inch III-V wafer is a few thousands
of USD, as opposed to a few tens of USD for a silicon wafer of the same size,
efficient use of the III-V material is important. Transfer printing solves this
problem, by transferring an array of preprocessed devices to the SOI. While this
technology is still not as mature as bonding technologies, the prospects it offers
are quite promising. As this work is aimed to improve the performance of laser
devices, the mature bonding technology is chosen.
8                                                                           CHAPTER 1


1.3.2 Adhesive bonding
Adhesive bonding for III-V on silicon integration is the preferred technology
compared to other bonding technologies [29–31] because it relaxes the surface
cleanliness requirements. It requires an adhesive bonding agent to be present
between the two bonded dies/wafers. This agent is typically a polymer. For
example, SU-8 [32], spin-on-glass [33], and divinylsiloxane-bis-
benzocyclobutene (DVS-BCB) [34] can be used. DVS-BCB, or BCB for short, is
usually the preferred bonding agent, due to the following factors (among others)
[24]: (1) high degree of planarization, (2) excellent chemical resistance, (3) high
optical clarity, and (4) low curing temperatures.
  The bonding process flow is summarized in Fig. 1.9 [24, 35]. The process starts
with spin coating BCB on the silicon substrate, pre-curing, and placing the III-V
dies. The sample then is placed in the bonder machine, which applies pressure at
high temperatures (280°C), over a duration of several hours in a vacuum chamber.
All the reported results in this work are based on devices fabricated by adhesive
bonding using BCB.




Figure 1.9: The bonding process of III-V dies on silicon substrate (figure from [24, 35]).

1.4       Modulation schemes and techniques
A characteristic of great importance for data communication is the maximum
modulation speed of the transmitters. As discussed earlier, the IEEE standards for
optical fiber communication are rapidly increasing in bitrate. To cope with this
increase, several state-of-the-art results have been reported for both monolithic
InP-based devices and heterogeneously integrated InP-on-Si laser devices. Before
discussing the state-of-the-art and the performance of our devices, the commonly
used modulation schemes and techniques will be discussed.
INTRODUCTION                                                                         9


1.4.1 Modulation schemes
In general, modulation schemes can be based on amplitude, frequency or phase
modulation. In this work, we use amplitude modulation for both our directly and
externally modulated laser diodes. The detection of the signals can be either
coherent or direct detection. In coherent detection, the carrier at the transmitter
and at the receiver side should be phase-locked (or extensive digital signal
processing is required when using free running lasers). This is not required in
direct detection. The advantage of coherent detection is the possibility to use
higher order modulation formats that offer higher spectral efficiency such as
quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) and quadrature amplitude modulation
(QAM). However, this increases the complexity of the system. For simplicity, we
use direct detection.
   Among other schemes, the two commonly used amplitude modulation schemes
are non-return-to-zero on-off-keying (NRZ-OOK), and four-level pulse amplitude
modulation (PAM-4). NRZ-OOK is the simplest two-level modulation format. It
requires the highest bandwidth of the components but there are no stringent
requirements on the linearity of the electronics and optics. It also provides the
highest receiver sensitivity. A signal with two power or voltage levels creates a
series of 1’s and 0’s as illustrated in Fig. 1.10 (a), which leads to an eye diagram
like the one in Fig. 1.11 (a) [36]. Eye diagrams measure the quality of the
transmission system by repetitively overlapping samples of the received data.




Figure 1.10: Data transmitted using (a) NRZ-OOK and (b) PAM-4 modulation schemes.




                  (a)                      (b)



Figure 1.11: Eye diagrams of (a) NRZ-OOK and (b) PAM-4 signals (figure from [36]).

   The downside of using NRZ-OOK is that it has low spectral efficiency. This
means that the available bandwidth is not used efficiently. PAM-4, a four-level
modulation scheme, is an alternative that provides higher spectral efficiency. This
allows doubling the bitrate for the same bandwidth, at the expense of lowering the
10                                                                     CHAPTER 1

modulation amplitude and increasing the linearity and signal-to-noise
requirements on electronic circuits and photonic devices. A signal with four
voltage or power levels creates a series of 00’s, 01’s, 10’s and 11’s as illustrated
in Fig. 1.10 (b), which results in the eye diagram in Fig. 1.11 (b) [36].

1.4.2 Direct versus external modulation techniques
To send information over an optical link using an optical signal, one of two
modulation techniques could be used. The first technique is direct modulation, in
which the electrical current flowing in the optical source (i.e. the laser) is
modulated by a series of 1’s and 0’s. As a result, the output optical signal is a
series of 1’s and 0’s. After that, the optical signal travels in the optical link (on-
or off-chip), and the reverse process happens at the receiver side, using a
photodetector. Directly modulated lasers (DMLs) are simple and compact, as the
presence of a modulator is not necessary. Fig. 1.12 (a) shows a simplified block
diagram of the operation of a directly modulated laser diode.




Figure 1.12: Schematic showing the basic operation of (a) direct modulation versus (b)
external modulation.

  Although the bandwidth of directly modulated lasers can be relatively high
[37], modulation at high frequencies often comes with a large chirp. This means
that not only the amplitude of the signal is modulated, but also the frequency.
Some work has been done to manage this chirp [38], which is not trivial,
especially at high data rates.
   The second modulation technique is external modulation. This is done by
introducing an (external) modulator, as shown in Fig. 1.12 (b). There are several
types of modulators, such as electro-optic modulators (EOMs), and electro-
absorption modulators (EAMs). Compared to direct modulation, external
modulation adds some complexity to the system. However, this is sometimes
necessary to improve the performance and enhance the modulation bandwidth of
an optical link. A simplified block diagram showing the operation of an externally
modulated laser diode is depicted in Fig. 1.12 (b).
INTRODUCTION                                                                     11

  Electro-optic modulators such as Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZMs) rely on
the principle of phase modulation. In a Mach-Zehnder configuration, light is
equally split into two arms. The refractive index in both arms is modulated by
carrier injection or depletion in a push-pull configuration. This induces a phase
difference between the two arms, which is converted to amplitude modulation at
the output. Many MZMs have been demonstrated [39–42]. However, these have
a high Vπ⋅Lπ product, where Vπ is the voltage required for a π phase shift over a
given length Lπ.
  The mechanism of electro-absorption modulation is simple: modulating the
absorption of an optical signal according to an electrical signal. This technique
has a bandwidth limited by the RC constant of the modulator, where C is typically
the junction capacitance and R is determined by the series resistance and output
impedance of the driver. As the junction capacitance decreases with decreasing
the width and the length of the EA modulator, a shorter and narrower EAM will
result in a higher modulation bandwidth. However, a small EAM area would limit
the extinction ratio, so a compromise must be sought. Many electro-absorption-
modulated lasers (EMLs) were demonstrated on different material platforms [43–
45].
  The main advantage of external modulation techniques is that they suffer less
from frequency modulation (chirp) compared to direct modulation. On the other
hand, the high insertion loss, high power consumption and circuit complexity
remain disadvantages for these techniques.

1.5      Attribution of work
  The choice of some design parameters (SOI, laser, and epitaxial structures) is
based on work of previous PhD students, namely Dr. Amin Abbasi and Mr.
Shahram Keyvaninia on standard single-section lasers. The design parameters
were often tuned by the author to optimize the performance. The simulations
shown in this thesis were done by the author, unless otherwise stated (e.g. citation
of another work).
   The fabrication was done by the author, based on the original fabrication recipe
developed by Dr. Amin Abbasi and Mr. Shahram Keyvaninia. The recipe was
often modified by the author, with certain steps added to perform certain
processes. Technical cleanroom support was occasionally provided by cleanroom
staff, namely Mr. Steven Verstuyft, Mr. Muhammad Muneeb, and Mrs. Liesbet
Van Landschoot (SEM and FIB). The ebeam SOI samples were fabricated by Mr.
Muhammad Muneeb, and the DUV SOI samples were fabricated by IMEC.
  The characterization was mainly done by the author, with equal contribution of
Mr. Keqi Ma in self-pulsation lasers. There was also occasional assistance by
IDLab, namely Mr. Joris Van Kerrebrouck in high speed characterization of the
electro-absorption modulator, in collaboration with Prof. Johan Bauwelinck and
Prof. Peter Ossieur.
12                                                                     CHAPTER 1


1.6      Outline
The content of this work, which consists of five chapters, is outlined below.
  Chapter 1 has put this work in context and has shown its significance. The
advantages of optical over electrical interconnects, and the main wavelengths of
operation for optical communication were laid out. The significance of silicon
photonics was discussed, leading to the advantages of heterogeneous integration
of III-V-on-silicon. Finally, as this thesis contains demonstrations of high-speed
devices, the main modulation schemes and techniques were introduced.
  In chapter 2, we provide essential background knowledge for the understanding
of this work. An overview of DFB laser diodes and other types of lasers is given.
Monolithic versus heterogeneously integrated III-V-on-silicon laser diodes are
compared. Moreover, basic technical knowledge of the fabrication procedure of
the different devices and their material composition is presented.
   Chapter 3 investigates the design and characterization of two-section DFB laser
diodes. First, self-pulsation DFB laser diodes are presented. Then, we use these
two-section lasers to achieve higher modulation bandwidth compared to their
equivalent single-section lasers. After that, we use the same devices to show low-
threshold DFB laser diodes, compared to their equivalent single-section DFB laser
diodes. These devices have a potential use in radio-over-fiber systems and data
communication applications.
  In chapter 4, we discuss the advances in III-V-on-Si electro-absorption
modulated DFB laser diodes. We show an improved design and demonstrate high-
speed data transmission of 80 Gbps NRZ-OOK signals, which is beneficial for
data communication applications.
   Chapter 5 shows a compact III-V-on-Si DFB laser diode. This is done by design
and simulation of an alternative short taper structure. The laser with the short taper
structure is fabricated and measured. Finally, the challenges for such a structure
are outlined.
 Finally, Chapter 6 draws conclusions and discusses the future prospects of this
work.
INTRODUCTION                                                               13


1.7     List of publications
This work has resulted in a number of publications in both international peer-
reviewed journals, and international conferences. These are listed below.
1.7.1 International peer-reviewed journals
 1. M. Shahin, J. Rahimi Vaskasi, J. Van Kerrebrouck, P. Ossieur, X. Yin, J.
    Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “80 Gbps NRZ-OOK Electro-
    Absorption Modulation of InP-on-Si DFB Laser Diodes,” IEEE Photonics
    Technology Letters, 31(7), pp. 533–536, (2019).
    (https://doi.org/10.1109/LPT.2019.2900518)
 2. M. Shahin, K. Ma, A. Abbasi, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “45 Gbps Direct
    Modulation of Two-Section InP-on-Si DFB Laser Diodes,” IEEE Photonics
    Technology Letters, 30(8), pp. 685–687, (2018).
    (https://doi.org/10.1109/LPT.2018.2811906)
 3. K. Ma, M. Shahin, A. Abbasi, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Demonstration of
    InP-on-Si Self-Pulsating DFB Laser Diodes for Optical Microwave
    Generation,” IEEE Photonics Journal, 9(4), p. 1504608, (2017).
    (https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOT.2017.2724840)
14                                                                  CHAPTER 1


1.7.2 International conferences
1. G. Morthier, M. Shahin, J. Rahimi Vaskasi, P. Ossieur, X. Yin, J.
   Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, “Towards high speed InP-on-silicon DFB lasers
   with low power consumption,” International Conference on Optics and
   Electro-Optics (ICOL) (invited), India, (2019).
2. K. Van Gasse, A. Abbasi, M. Shahin, J. Verbist, J. Van Kerrebrouck, G.
   Torfs, B. Moeneclaey, J. Bauwelinck, X. Yin, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier,
   “Silicon photonic Radio-over-Fiber transceivers and microwave photonic up-
   converters,” (invited), Photonics and Electromagnetics Research Symposium
   (PIERS), Italy, (2019).
3. M. Shahin, J. Rahimi Vaskasi, J. Van Kerrebrouck, A. Abbasi, K. Van
   Gasse, M. Muneeb, L. Breyne, P. Ossieur, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G.
   Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Demonstration of 80 Gbps NRZ-OOK Electro-
   Absorption Modulation of InP-on-Si DFB Laser Diodes,” Conference on
   Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), United States, (2019).
4. M. Shahin, J. Van Kerrebrouck, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “InP-on-Si DFB
   Laser Diode with Distributed Reflector for Improved Power Efficiency,”
   European Conference on Integrated Optics (ECIO), Belgium, (2019).
5. M. Shahin, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Compact InP-on-Si DFB Laser
   Diodes,” IEEE Photonics Society Benelux Symposium, Belgium, (2018).
6. A. Rahim, A. Abbasi, M. Shahin, Nuno Sequeira Andre, Andre Richter, Joris
   Van Kerrebrouck, K. Van Gasse, A. Katumba, Bart Moeneclaey, Xin Yin, G.
   Morthier, R. Baets, G. Roelkens, “50 Gb/s DMT and 120 Mb/s LTE signal
   transmission over 5 km of optical fiber using a silicon photonics transceiver,”
   Advanced Photonics Congress, Switzerland, (2018).
7. G. Muliuk, K. Van Gasse, M. Shahin, J. Verbist, A. J. Trindade, B. Corbett,
   D. Van Thourhout, G. Roelkens, “4x25Gbit/s Silicon Photonics Tunable
   Receiver using Transfer Printed III-V Photodiodes,” IEEE Photonics
   Conference (IPC), United States, (2018).
8. M. Shahin, A. Abbasi, K. Ma, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Towards High
   Modulation Bandwidth using Two-Section InP-on-Si DFB Laser Diodes,”
   IEEE Photonics Society Benelux Symposium, The Netherlands, (2017).
9. M. Shahin, K. Ma, A. Abbasi, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Demonstration of
   Self-Pulsating InP-on-Si DFB Laser Diodes,” IEEE Photonics Conference
   (IPC), United States, (2017).
10. G. Morthier, A. Abbasi, M. Shahin, J. Verbist, G. Roelkens, “High speed
    modulation of InP membrane DFB laser diodes,” International Conference
    on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON) (invited), Italy, (2016).
INTRODUCTION                                                                             15


References
[1] Intel. URL: https://itpeernetwork.intel.com/data-centre-predictions-2017/, (2017).
[2] J. Bowers, URL: http://cadlab.ece.ucsb.edu/optical
[3] M. Wartak, “Computational photonics: an introduction with MATLAB,” Cambridge
University Press, (2013).
[4] Wikipedia, URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-mode_optical_fiber
[5] 802.3bm-2015 - IEEE Standard for Ethernet - Amendment 3: Physical Layer
Specifications and Management Parameters for 40 Gb/s and 100 Gb/s Operation over Fiber
Optic Cables, (2015).
[6] G. Dummer, “Electronic inventions and discoveries, electronics from its earliers
beginnings to the present day” 3rd edition, Pergamon, (1983).
[7] J. Nishizawa et al., “Optical waveguiding structure containing materials of relatively
high refractive index and relatively low refractive index,” Japanese patent filed S39–64040,
(1964).
[8] T. Okoshi, “Optical fibers,” 1st edition, Elsevier, (1982).
[9] R. Soref, “The Past, Present, and Future of Silicon Photonics,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, 12(6), pp. 1678–1687, (2006).
[10] R. A. Soref and J. P. Lorenzo, “Single-crystal silicon: a new material for 1.3 and 1.6
μm integrated-optical components,” Electronics Letters, 21(21), pp. 953–954, (1985).
[11] “imec: Next-generation silicon photonics,” URL: https://www.imec-int.com/en/next-
generation-silicon-photonics, (2019).
[12] P. Dumon, W. Bogaerts, V. Wiaux, J. Wouters, S. Beckx, J. V. Campenhout, D.
Taillaert, B. Luyssaert, P. Bienstman, D. V. Thourhout, and R. Baets, “Low-loss SOI
photonic wires and ring resonators fabricated with deep UV lithography,” IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, 16(5), pp. 1328–1330, (2004).
[13] Y. A. Vlasov and S. J. McNab, “Losses in single-mode silicon-oninsulator strip
waveguides and bends,” Optics Express 12(8), pp. 1622–1631, (2004).
[14] J. Niehusmann, A. Vorckel, P. H. Bolivar, T. Wahlbrink, W. Henschel, and H. Kurz,
“Ultrahigh-quality-factor silicon-on-insulator microring resonator,” Optics Letters, 29(24),
pp. 2861–2863, (2004).
[15] D. Taillaert, F. Van Laere, M. Ayre, W. Bogaerts, D. Van Thourhout, P. Bienstman,
and R. Baets, “Grating couplers for coupling between optical fibers and nanophotonic
waveguides,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 45(8R), p. 6071, (2006).
[16] T. Fukazawa, F. Ohno, and T. Baba, “Very compact arrayedwaveguide-grating
demultiplexer using Si photonic wire waveguides,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics,
43(5B), p. L673, (2004).
[17] Q. Xu, S. Manipatruni, B. Schmidt, J. Shakya, and M. Lipson, “12.5 Gbit/s carrier-
injection-based silicon micro-ring silicon modulators,” Optics Express, 15(2), pp. 430–
436, (2007).
16                                                                          CHAPTER 1

[18] S. Manipatruni, R. K. Dokania, B. Schmidt, N. Sherwood-Droz, C. B. Poitras, A. B.
Apsel, and M. Lipson, “Wide temperature range operation of micrometer-scale silicon
electro-optic modulators,” Optics Letters, 33(19), pp. 2185–2187, (2008).
[19] L. Liao, D. Samara-Rubio, M. Morse, A. Liu, D. Hodge, D. Rubin, U. D. Keil, and T.
Franck, “High speed silicon Mach-Zehnder modulator,” Optics Express, 13(8), pp. 3129–
3135, (2005).
[20] J. Liu, M. Beals, A. Pomerene, S. Bernardis, R. Sun, J. Cheng, L. C. Kimerling, J.
Michel, “Waveguide-integrated, ultralow-energy GeSi electro-absorption modulators,”
Nature Photonics 2, 433–437, (2008).
[21] J. Verbist, M. Verplaetse, S. A. Srinivasan, J. Van Kerrebrouck, P. De Heyn, P. Absil,
T. De Keulenaer, R. Pierco, A. Vyncke, G. Torfs, X. Yin, G. Roelkens, J. Van Campenhout,
J. Bauwelinck, “Real-time 100 Gb/s NRZ and EDB transmission with a GeSi electro-
absorption modulator for short-reach optical interconnects,” Journal of Lightwave
Technology, 36(1), pp. 90–96, (2018).
[22] J. Liu, D. D. Cannon, K. Wada, Y. Ishikawa, S. Jongthammanurak, D. T. Danielson,
J. Michel, and L. C. Kimerling, “Tensile strained Ge p–i–n photodetectors on Si platform
for C and L band telecommunications”, Applied Physics Letters, 87, p. 11110, (2005).
[23] P.P. Absil, P. De Heyn, P. Dumon, D. Van Thourhout, P. Verheyen, S. Selvaraja, G.
Lepage, M. Pantouvaki, M. Rakowski, J. Van Campenhout, “Advances in silicon photonics
WDM devices, Conference on Next-Generation Optical Networks for Data Centers and
Short-Reach Links” (invited), p. 90100J, (2014).
[24] G. Roelkens, A. Abassi, P. Cardile, U. Dave, A. de Groote, Y. de Koninck, S. Dhoore,
X. Fu, A. Gassenq, N. Hattasan, Q. Huang, S. Kumari, S. Keyvaninia, B. Kuyken, L. Li,
P. Mechet, M. Muneeb, D. Sanchez, H. Shao, T. Spuesens, A. Z. Subramanian, S. Uvin,
M. Tassaert, K. van Gasse, J. Verbist, R. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. van Campenhout,
X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G. Morthier, R. Baets, and D. van Thourhout, “III-V-on-Silicon
Photonic Devices for Optical Communication and Sensing,” Photonics , 3, pp. 969–1004,
(2015).
[25] T. Mitze, M. Schnarrenberger, L. Zimmermann, J. Bruns, F. Fidorra, K. Janiak, J.
Kreissl, S. Fidorra, H. Heidrich, and K. Petermann, “CWDM transmitter module based on
hybrid integration,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 12(5), pp.
983–987, (2006).
[26] D. Fehly, A. Schlachetzki, A. S. Bakin, A. Guttzeit, and H.-H. Wehmann, “Monolithic
InGaAsP optoelectronic devices with silicon electronics,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Quantum Electronics, 37(10), pp. 1246–1252, (2001).
[27] G. Roelkens, L. Liu, D. Liang, R. Jones, A. Fang, B. Koch, J. Bowers, “III-V/silicon
photonics for on-chip and inter-chip optical interconnects,” Laser & Photonics Reviews,
4(6), pp. 751–779, (2010).
[28] A. De Groote, P. Cardile, A. Subramanian, A. Fecioru, C. Bower, D. Delbeke, R.
Baets, G. Roelkens, “Transfer-printing-based integration of single-mode waveguide-
coupled III-V-on-silicon broadband light emitters,” Optics Express, 24(13), pp. 13754–
13762, (2016).

[29] B. Lee, S. Seok, K. Chun, “A study on wafer level vacuum packaging for MEMS
devices,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 13(5), pp. 663–669, (2003).
INTRODUCTION                                                                            17

[30] N. Miki and S. M. Spearing, “Effect of nanoscale surface roughness on the bonding
energy of direct-bonded silicon wafers,” Journal of Applied Physics, 94(10), pp. 6800–
6806, (2003).
[31] C. C. Lee and R. W. Chuang, “Fluxless non-eutectic joints fabricated using gold-tin
multilayer composite,” IEEE Transactions on Components and Packaging Technologies,
26(2), pp. 416–422, (2003).
[32] F. J. Blanco, M. Agirregabiria, J. Garcia, J. Berganzo, M. Tijero, M. T. Arroyo, J. M.
Ruano, I. Aramburu, and K. Mayora, “Novel three-dimensional embedded SU-8
microchannels fabricated using a low temperature full wafer adhesive bonding,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, 14(7), 1047–1056, (2004).
[33] H. C. Lin, K. L. Chang, G. W. Pickrell, K. C. Hsieh, and K. Y. Cheng, “Low
temperature wafer bonding by spin on glass,” Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology
B, 20(2), pp. 752–754, (2002).
[34] F. Niklaus, H. Andersson, P. Enoksson, and G. Stemme, “Low temperature full wafer
adhesive bonding of structured wafers,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 92(1-3), pp.
235–241, (2001).
[35] S. Tanaka, T. Akiyama, S. Sekiguchu, K. Morito, “Silicon photonics optical
transmitter technology for Tb/s-class I/O co-packaged with CPU,” FUJUTSI Scientific and
Technical Journal, 50, pp. 123–131, (2014).
[36] X. Miao, M. Bi, Y. Fu, L. Li, and W. Hu “Experimental Study of NRZ, Duobinary
and PAM-4 in O-band DML-based 100G-EPON,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters,
29, pp. 1490–1493, (2017).
[37] Y. Matsui, R. Schatz, T. Pham, W. A. Ling, G. Carey, H. M. Daghighian, D. Adams,
T. Sudo, and C. Roxlo , “55 GHz Bandwidth Distributed Reflector Laser,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 35(3), pp. 397–403, (2017).
[38] A. Abbasi, B. Moeneclaey, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier,
“10G/28G Chirp Managed 20 km Links based on Silicon Photonics Transceivers,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, 29(16), pp.1324–1327, (2017).
[39] X. Xiao, H. Xu, X. Li, Z. Li, T. Chu, Y. Yu, and J. Yu, "High-speed, low-loss silicon
Mach–Zehnder modulators with doping optimization," Optics Express, 21(4), pp. 4116–
4125, (2013).
[40] L. Yang, J. Ding, “High-Speed Silicon Mach–Zehnder Optical Modulator With Large
Optical Bandwidth,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 32(5), pp. 966–970, (2014).
[41] M. Streshinsky, R. Ding, Y. Liu, A. Novack, Y. Yang, Y. Ma, X. Tu, E. Koh, S. Chee,
A. Eu-Jin Lim, P. Guo-Qiang Lo, T. Baehr-Jones, and M. Hochberg, "Low power 50 Gb/s
silicon traveling wave Mach-Zehnder modulator near 1300 nm," Optics Express 21(25),
pp. 30350–30357, (2013).
[42] D. Patel, S. Ghosh, M. Chagnon, A. Samani, V. Veerasubramanian, M. Osman, and
D. V. Plant, "Design, analysis, and transmission system performance of a 41 GHz silicon
photonic modulator," Optics Express 23(11), pp. 14263–14287, (2015).
[43] M. Theurer, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Chen, L. Chen, L. Zeng, U. Troppenz, G.
Przyrembel, A. Sigmund, M. Moehrle, and M. Schell “2 × 56 GB/s From a Double Side
Electroabsorption Modulated DFB Laser and Application in Novel Optical PAM4
Generation,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 35(4), pp. 706–710, (2017).
18                                                                        CHAPTER 1

[44] A. Abbasi, L. A. Shiramin, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, D. Van
Thourhout, G. Roelkens, and G. Morthier, “III-V-on-Silicon C-band High-Speed Electro-
Absorption Modulated DFB Laser,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 36(2), pp. 252–
257, (2018).
[45] A. Abbasi J. Verbist, L. A. Shiramin, M. Verplaetse, T. De Keulenaer, R. Vaernewyck,
R. Pierco, A. Vyncke, X. Yin, G. Torfs, G. Morthier, J. Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, “100-
Gb/s Electro-Absorptive Duobinary Modulation of an InP-on-Si DFB Laser,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, 30(12), pp. 1095–1098, (2018).
 2   Overview of DFB Laser Diodes
                                                                  2
Contents
       2.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 19
       2.2 Introduction to lasers ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 20
       2.3 Introduction to laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 21
       2.4 DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 29
       2.5 III-V-on-silicon laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 32
       2.6 Monolithic versus heterogeneous III-V-on-Si ⋅ ⋅ 33
       2.7 Fabrication of III-V-on-silicon DFB laser diodes ⋅ 36
       2.8 III-V epitaxial layer structures used in this work ⋅ 43
       2.9 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 47
       References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 47


2.1      Introduction
Distributed feedback (DFB) laser diodes are the devices of choice in this work to
realize different on-chip laser functionalities on the developed III-V-on-silicon
platform. Before discussing these functionalities in detail, this chapter provides
an appropriate background of the theory and technology discussed in the
following chapters. We first describe the basics of lasers and laser diodes. Then,
we discuss the operation and structure of DFB laser diodes. After that, we briefly
describe other common types of lasers, while placing them all in the context of
heterogeneous integration of III-V-on-silicon. Then, we compare monolithic III-
V and heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon laser diodes. After that, we discuss the
fabrication procedure of III-V-on-silicon DFB lasers. Finally, we show the three
III-V epitaxial layer structures used in this work.



                                       19
20                                                                    CHAPTER 2


2.2      Introduction to lasers
The word LASER is an acronym for “Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission
of Radiation”. As the name suggests, lasers are devices that emit light through an
amplification process called “stimulated emission”. Generally, lasers consist of
three main components: (1) an active (gain) medium, (2) a pumping mechanism,
and (3) optical feedback, as exemplified in Fig. 2.1.




Figure 2.1: Lasers consist of three main components: an active (gain) medium, a pump
mechanism, and optical feedback.

  Pumping provides the energy source to generate light. This can be electrical
pumping as shown in Fig. 2.1, or optical pumping using another light source. The
active medium is made of materials that can generate and amplify light over a
certain wavelength range. The ability of the active medium to increase the optical
power is referred to as the gain of the medium. The active medium together with
the optical feedback mechanism (e.g. the mirrors in Fig. 2.1) forms an oscillator.
In order to extract the laser light, one of the mirrors can be designed to have a
lower reflectivity than the other.
   Today, many types of lasers exist for many different applications. We can
classify these lasers depending on their active medium. For example, solid-state
lasers use crystalline materials as their active medium. The first working laser was
a solid state laser invented in 1960 by Theodore Maiman. This laser was the Ruby
laser, with its active medium being Ruby (chromium-doped corundum). It
operated in the visible region, with the wavelength of operation being 694.3 nm.
Due to its limitations in terms of low output power, low efficiency, and its pulsed
operation, other lasers started to outperform it. Other examples include gas lasers,
with the active medium being a gas. The first gas laser was the famous Helium-
Neon (HeNe) laser invented in 1961 by Bell Labs. This bulky laser had a
continuous-wave (CW) operation at 633 nm.
  Laser diodes are the lasers of choice in this work. This type of lasers is
sometimes referred to as semiconductor lasers, as the active medium consists of
semiconductor materials. This laser outperforms the other types of lasers in terms
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                           21

of the price, compactness, and power consumption. Basics of laser diodes are
discussed in more detail in the next section.

2.3      Introduction to laser diodes
2.3.1 Spontaneous and stimulated emission, and absorption
To explain the “lasing” operation in laser diodes, two important concepts must be
introduced. The first concept is spontaneous emission, illustrated in Fig. 2.2 (a).
Spontaneous emission occurs when an electron transits from the conduction to the
valence band, which results in an emitted photon. In this case, the phase of the
generated photons is random. Although the light is generated, the lasing operation
has not yet started. The reverse process to spontaneous emission is absorption. In
this process, an electron absorbs the energy of an incident photon, and uses it to
transit from the valence to the conduction band, as shown in Fig. 2.2 (b).




Figure 2.2: (a) spontaneous emission, (b) absorption, and (c) stimulated emission

   One of the main properties of laser light is coherence (i.e. all photons are in-
phase). This happens if the photons generated by spontaneous emission start to
stimulate other transitions (i.e. from the conduction to the valence band). This is
illustrated in Fig. 2.2 (c), where an input of one incident photon results in an output
of two photons (the incident photon and the stimulated photon). This process is
referred to as stimulated emission. The photons generated by this process have the
same wavelength (frequency) and phase as the incident photons, which is the
origin of light coherence in lasers. The bandgap energy 𝐸𝑔 is defined as the
difference between the conduction band 𝐸𝑐 and the valence band 𝐸𝑣 energy
levels, as given by (2.1). The photon energy, and consequently the wavelength
(frequency) of this photon is also determined by the bandgap, as given by (2.1).

                              𝐸𝑔 = 𝐸𝑐 − 𝐸𝑣 ≅ ℎ𝑣                                     (2.1)

where ℎ is Planck’s constant, and 𝑣 is the frequency of the photon. The frequency
is related to the wavelength 𝜆 and speed of light 𝑐 by:

                                    𝑣 = 𝑐/𝜆                                         (2.3)
22                                                                    CHAPTER 2

  It is important to note that the occurrence of stimulated emission does not mean
the lasing action has started yet. To achieve lasing, the optical gain should
compensate the internal and cavity losses. This point is referred to as the lasing
threshold, and the corresponding gain is referred to as the threshold gain 𝑔𝑡ℎ ,
expressed by:

                                          1     1                            (2.4)
                          𝑔𝑡ℎ = 𝑎0 +        ln(    )
                                          2𝐿 𝑅1 𝑅2

                          Internal loss    Cavity loss
where 𝑎0 is the internal loss, 𝑅1 and 𝑅2 are the mirror reflectivities, and 𝐿 is the
length of the active medium. The second term represents the cavity loss.

2.3.2 Direct and indirect band structures
As was shown in Fig. 2.2, the transition of an electron from the conduction to the
valence band produces a photon. There are two types of band structures: direct
and indirect. If the electrons at the bottom of the conduction band and the holes at
the top of the valence band have the same momentum, i.e. they can recombine
without the need of momentum change, then the band structure is direct. On the
other hand, if the recombination requires a momentum change, then the band
structure is indirect. To give some examples, Fig. 2.3 illustrates the direct band
structure of InP (left), and the indirect band structure of silicon (right) [1].
There are two types of carrier recombination: radiative and non-radiative
recombination. Depending on the band structure, one recombination mechanism
can be more dominant than the other. In radiative recombination, an electron in
the conduction band recombines with a hole in the valence band, resulting in a
photon emission. This can be either spontaneous or stimulated emission.
However, sometimes a non-radiative recombination occurs, such as
recombination through defect or trap levels (Shockley-Read-Hall), or when the
energy released by electron hole recombination is transferred to another electron
(Auger recombination). Another non-radiative recombination mechanism is
surface recombination. In this mechanism, trap states at the surface act as a non-
radiative recombination center. Non-radiative recombination mechanisms are
dominant in materials with indirect bandgap structures. On the other hand,
radiative recombination is easier and more efficient in materials with direct band
structures. This is because in an indirect band structure, recombination requires a
lattice vibration (phonon), which makes light generation inefficient.
  Fig. 2.4 shows group II to VI materials of the periodic table. Group IV contains
indirect band structure materials, such as Silicon (Si) and Germanium (Ge). By
combining elements in group III and V, one can get direct bandgap materials. An
example is Indium-Phosphide (InP) or Gallium-Arsenide (GaAs). Direct bandgap
materials offer the possibility to make active devices such as lasers and
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                          23

photodiodes. Depending on the bandgap energy levels of the material, the
emission wavelength and thus the application can differ. It is worth mentioning
that not all III-V materials are direct bandgap. For example, Aluminum-Antimony
(AlSb) is an indirect bandgap material. Combining II-VI materials can also result
in direct bandgap materials, such as Zinc-Oxide (ZnO) and Cadmium-Oxide
(CdO) [2].




Figure 2.3: Energy band diagrams of InP direct band structure (left) and silicon indirect
band structure (right) (figure from [1]).




Figure 2.4: The periodic table showing group II to group VI materials, which contains
many direct and indirect bandgap materials.
24                                                                          CHAPTER 2


2.3.3 The PN junction
We have introduced the concept of spontaneous and stimulated emission. Laser
diodes use the concept of stimulated emission for the generation of light. We have
also introduced direct and indirect bandgap materials, and how the former has
more efficient light generation properties. Using this knowledge, we will
introduce the structure of a laser diode: The PN junction.
   A PN junction brings n- and p-doped semiconductor materials together to form
a junction. The n-doped material contains an excess concentration of electrons,
while the p-doped contains an excess concentration of holes. Holes can be defined
here as the absence of an electron. The concentration of electrons is expressed by
the Fermi levels Ef in Fig. 2.5 (a, b), where the Fermi level is higher in an n-doped
material than in a p-doped material. We have previously introduced Ec and Ev as
the energies of the conduction and the valence bands, respectively. Ei is defined
as the intrinsic Fermi level, for an undoped material, with an equal electron and
hole concentrations. Bringing the p- and n-doped materials together would result
in the PN junction shown in Fig. 2.5 (c) with a built-in potential (Vbi). The junction
formed when two semiconductor materials with the same bandgap are brought
together is referred to as a homojunction, as shown in Fig. 2.5 (c). On the other
hand, if the bandgaps were different, then it is referred to as a heterojunction or a
heterostructure, as illustrated later in Fig. 2.7.
  Looking at the PN junctions under different bias conditions helps to understand
the working mechanism. Let’s consider the two cases of zero and forward bias
shown in Fig. 2.6 (a, b). Under zero bias, the electron in the n-type material cannot
make it to the p-type material due to the built-in potential, as seen in Fig. 2.6 (a).
Therefore, forward biasing the junction is necessary. Fig. 2.6 (b) shows the
forward biasing of a PN-junction in which the electrical current starts to pass
through the junction, and the electrons start to recombine with the holes. Efn
represents the electron concentration in the n-type, while Efp represents the
electron concentration in the p-type.




Figure 2.5: (a, b) p- and n-doped materials, with the Fermi levels indicating the
concentration of electrons and holes, (c) shows the PN junction and its built-in potential.
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                   25




Figure 2.6: PN junction under (a) zero bias, and (b) under forward bias

   Although PN junctions are useful, the commonly used junctions for most
photonic applications are PIN junctions. The energy diagrams of PN and PIN
junctions are shown in Fig. 2.7 (a, b). The difference between the two is the
undoped intrinsic region between the heavily doped p- and the n- type regions in
PIN junctions. This creates a longer region (with a smaller bandgap in the case of
a heterojunction) in which the electrons and holes can recombine to generate
photons. When PIN junctions are formed by two heterojunctions, they are referred
to as double heterojunctions. A special type of double heterojunction is a quantum
well, in which only certain energy levels are allowed inside the well. The energy
diagram of a quantum well is shown in Fig. 2.7 (c).




Figure 2.7: The energy diagram of (a) a PN heterojunction, (b) a PIN double
heterojunction and (c) a quantum well double heterojunction
26                                                                     CHAPTER 2




Figure 2.8: Various photonic applications of PIN junctions

   PIN junctions can be used for different applications, depending on the bias
conditions, as shown in the current-voltage characteristics in Fig. 2.8. If the
junction is forward biased in quadrant I, then it can be used as an LED or as a
laser diode. In this case, injected carriers are used to produce photons. This is the
quadrant that our devices operate at.
  If the junction is reverse-biased (quadrant III) with a negative voltage, then it
can be used as a photodetector. Here, the opposite happens: photons are used to
generate carriers. With more incident light, the achieved reverse current increases.
Finally, forward-biased junctions can be used in quadrant IV as solar cells, where
energy is produced by incident light.

2.3.4 Bulk versus multi quantum wells
We have briefly introduced III-V materials. These materials can be put in different
structures. Bulk III-V materials are the simplest form of materials used as an
active medium. In such a material, a potential well confines the electrons and
holes, and a photon is generated when a transition of an electron from the
conduction to the valence band happens. The energy of this photon E was already
discussed in the previous section. Lasers with bulk materials exhibit high
threshold currents due to the moderate gain levels [3]. This results in low output
power, and poor performance at high temperatures. The widely used III-V
structures that overcome the issues of bulk III-V structures are multi quantum
wells (MQWs).
  Fig. 2.9 shows a comparison between the band structures of InGaAsP (a) bulk
and (b) MQWs. Bulk III-V materials are comprised of one potential well, as
shown in Fig. 2.9 (a). MQWs, on the other hand, are comprised of multiple
potential wells separated by multiple barriers. Moreover, the potential well in a
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                       27

QW is typically thinner than in bulk materials, with quantum well and barrier
thicknesses of 4–8 nm and 7–15 nm, respectively. If the thickness of the well is
smaller than the De Broglie wavelength of the electrons and holes (which is
proportional to the momentum of the electrons and holes), then the kinetic
energies of the electrons are quantized in the wells [3]. The transition then happens
between the different sub-bands of electrons and holes. The energy levels and
therefore the bandgap can be engineered by controlling the width of the well.
   However, light confinement in such a thin structure is an issue. Separate
confinement heterostructures (SCHs) shown in Fig. 2.9 (b) are used to improve
light confinement. Like quantum wells, SCHs have high refractive indices
compared to the other surrounding materials, and thus by sandwiching the
quantum wells, effective light confinement is achieved.




Figure 2.9: Band structures of InGaAsP (a) bulk and (b) multi quantum wells

2.3.5 Multi quantum wells for 1.3 and 1.55 μm
For telecommunication applications in the 1.3 and 1.55 μm windows, there are
three widely used III-V MQW materials: (1) Indium-Gallium-Arsenide-
Phosphide grown on an Indium-Phosphide substrate (InGaAsP/InP), (2) Indium-
Gallium-Aluminum-Arsenide grown on an Indium-Phosphide substrate
(InAlGaAs/InP), and (3) Gallium-Indium-Nitride-Arsenide grown on a Gallium-
Arsenide substrate (GaInNAs/GaAs).
  The first parameter to investigate is the energy or potential depth of the quantum
wells. This indicates the uniformity and leakage of the electrons and holes during
the injection. Since the mass of the electrons is much smaller than that of the holes,
we normally focus more on the conduction band offset ΔEc. Fig. 2.10 shows a
comparison between the band structures of the three investigated materials.
InAlGaAs has a higher conduction band offset (0.27 eV) compared to InGaAsP
(0.1 eV), with GaInNAs having the highest one (0.4 eV). Large conduction band
offset results in a better confinement effect on the injected electrons [4]. This is
explained by the increased momentum that an electron needs to escape the
potential well if the conduction band offset is high. This results in better
temperature characteristics for GaInNAs and InAlGaAs, due to the reduction of
electron current leakage. Electron current leakage is the dominant form of leakage
28                                                                      CHAPTER 2

in comparison to hole current leakage, due to the higher electron mobility. Low
electron leakage and high electron uniformity are desired to get a high gain.




Figure 2.10: Band structures showing the conduction and valence band offsets (ΔEc, ΔEv)
of (a) InGaAsP/InP, (b) InAlGaAs/InP, and (c) GaInNAs/GaAs quantum wells [4]

   The second parameter to discuss is the characteristic temperature To, a figure of
merit for the temperature stability. This is defined by the empirical expression in
(2.5), where 𝐼𝑡ℎ (𝑇) is the threshold current at a certain absolute temperature T.
One of the parameters that the characteristic temperature depends on is the
conduction band offset ΔEc [5]. Fig. 2.11 shows a comparison between the
characteristic temperatures of the three aforementioned materials [5]. GaInNAs
proves to be the best in terms of temperature stability. However, it is very difficult
to extend its emission wavelength beyond 1.3 μm while also maintaining good
laser properties. Both InGaAsP and InAlGaAs operate well in the 1.3 and 1.55
μm windows, with the temperature stability of InAlGaAs being higher than that
of InGaAsP due to the higher conduction band offset ΔEc [5].
                                                  𝑇
                                                                                (2.5)
                              𝐼𝑡ℎ (T) = 𝐼𝑡ℎ (0) 𝑒 𝑇0




Figure 2.11: The characteristic temperature To versus the conduction band offset ΔEc
showing the outstanding temperature stability in GaInNAs [5]
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                     29

  To sum up, GaInNAs shows the best performance among the three MQW
materials. However, it is difficult to extend its emission wavelength beyond 1.3
μm. Both InGaAsP and InAlGaAs are mature in terms of production [4].
InAlGaAs seems to be the most suitable material: due to its deep wells, and high
characteristic temperature To. Special care should be taken during the fabrication
of InAlGaAs, due to the oxidization of aluminum, which can create trap states.

2.4 DFB laser diodes
This section discusses the operation and structure of distributed feedback (DFB)
lasers, by comparing them to the structure of the most basic type of laser: the
Fabry-Perot laser.

2.4.1 Fabry-Perot laser diodes
The very basic type of laser is the Fabry-Perot (FP) laser. The laser consists of an
active medium to provide optical gain and two highly reflective mirrors on each
end to provide optical feedback. The optical output can be taken from either side
by slightly reducing the reflectivity of its mirror.
  Fig. 2.12 (a) shows the structure and operation of a FP laser. The laser has a
multimode behaviour, because (1) many modes are supported by the cavity, and
(2) many modes have enough gain to resonate. The wavelength of the supported
FP modes 𝜆 that satisfies the phase condition for constructive interference is
dependent on the cavity length L, as given by:

                                𝑚𝜆 = 2𝐿 𝑛𝑒                                   (2.5)

where 𝑛𝑒 is the effective index of the waveguide, 2𝐿 is the roundtrip distance, and
𝑚 is an integer number. Based on (2.5), the separation between two modes
referred to as the free spectral range (FSR) ∆𝜆𝐹𝑆𝑅 , can be defined by (2.6), where
𝑛𝑔 is the group index.

                                          𝜆2
                               ∆𝜆𝐹𝑆𝑅 =                                       (2.6)
                                         2𝐿 𝑛𝑔

  In optical communication, and for the use of Dense Wavelength-Division
multiplexing (DWDM), only one wavelength per channel is permitted. Therefore,
single-mode lasers are preferred. As mentioned earlier, to make a single-mode FP
laser, the separation between the two modes in Fig. 2.12 (a) needs to be very large,
such that only one mode falls under the gain spectrum. From (2.6), a large FSR
requires a short cavity. However, a short cavity may not be able to provide enough
optical gain unless the reflections are high. Therefore, a FP laser is not a good
candidate for use in an optical communication system. In contrast, DFB laser
diodes fulfill the requirements of single mode operation and are thus a strong
candidate for DWDM.
30                                                                       CHAPTER 2




Figure 2.12: The structure, simplified operation and spectrum of (a) Fabry-Perot and (b)
DFB lasers.

2.4.2 DFB laser diodes
   DFB lasers were first proposed in [6–7], first optically [8–9] and then
electrically pumped [10–11]. They are popular for a number of reasons. First, their
ease of fabrication, due to the grating being on top of the active region.
Additionally, their stable single-mode behavior, and their high side-mode
suppression ratio (SMSR) make them the preferred optical source for optical
communication. DFB lasers with more than 45 dB SMSR were demonstrated [12],
indicating high spectral purity. Moreover, they are made of a horizontal cavity (as
opposed to the vertical cavity in VCSELs), which makes their integration with
other components on-chip possible. To understand how a DFB laser works, a
comparison between its operation, structure, and spectrum is made to that of a FP
laser, as illustrated in Fig. 2.12 (b).
   In a DFB laser, the FP mirrors are replaced by a periodic structure along the
cavity. This periodic structure introduces a periodic change in the effective index,
which causes partial (distributed) reflections at each index step in the cavity.
These reflections create forward and backward propagating waves (feedback) that
interfere constructively and destructively, depending on the wavelength. In some
cases, one side is covered by a high reflective coating to increase the feedback
into the laser.
  The periodic structure used is the so-called DFB grating, shown in Fig. 2.12
(b). The period of the grating 𝛬 is usually in the order of a few hundred
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                              31

nanometers, and it defines the wavelength of operation, also called the Bragg
wavelength 𝜆𝐵 , as given by (2.7). 𝑚 is an integer number which defines the order
of diffraction. For example, for 𝑚 = 1, the grating is called a first order grating.
Shifting the Bragg wavelength can be done by changing the period of the grating
and/or the effective index 𝑛𝑒 .

                                   𝑚𝜆𝐵 = 2 𝑛𝑒 𝛬                                      (2.7)




Figure 2.13: A π phase-shift in the middle grating in (a) prevents multiple of 2π round trip.
Adding an extra λ/4 (π) phase shift in (b) solves this problem [13].




                      Wavelength/nm                           Wavelength/nm

Figure 2.14: Spectra at threshold (a) without and (b) with λ/4 phase shift [3].

   The DFB spectrum in Fig. 2.12 (b) was simplified. In reality, fabricating a
grating like the one in Fig. 2.13 (a) [13] would result in two modes around the
Bragg wavelength (Fig. 2.14 (a) [3]) (assuming anti-reflective coated facets). The
two modes have the same intensity level due to having the same threshold gain.
There is no mode at the Bragg wavelength because the roundtrip phase is not a
multiple of 2π (due to the π phase shift in the middle). To ensure a single-mode
behavior at the Bragg wavelength (Fig. 2.14 (b) [3]), a λ/4 phase shift is placed in
the middle of the cavity, like the one in Fig. 2.13 (b). This introduces a π phase
shift, which would make the roundtrip a multiple of 2π. Other higher order modes
are visible at the edge of the spectrum in Fig. 2.14 (b), but they have a higher
threshold gain than the main mode.
32                                                                          CHAPTER 2

   While adding a phase shift can help to obtain single-mode behavior, it results
in a non-uniform power across the cavity, resulting in spatial hole burning. Some
research suggests that introducing multiple phase shifts across the cavity helps to
maintain a uniform power, which helps to obtain single-mode behavior [14–15].

2.5 III-V-on-silicon laser diodes
In the previous chapter, we discussed the heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon
integration methods. Before these methods existed, devices such as laser diodes
were made using only III-V materials, and were referred to as monolithic III-V
laser diodes. These were fabricated and used for many years before III-V-on-
silicon laser diodes. While III-V-on-silicon can use the advantages of silicon such
as high volume production at low cost, the technology to fabricate monolithic III-
V laser diodes remains more mature.
   In the previous section, we have discussed the operation and structure of FP and
DFB laser diodes. There are however other common types of laser diodes. For
example, vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs), and distributed Bragg
reflector (DBR) lasers. In this section, we briefly describe these, while placing all
four types of lasers in the context of heterogeneously integrated III-V-on-silicon
lasers, as shown in Fig. 2.15.




Figure 2.15: Most common types of heterogeneously integrated III-V-on-silicon lasers,
(a) Fabry Perot laser, (b) Distributed feedback laser, (c) Vertical-cavity surface-emitting
laser, and (d) Distributed Bragg reflector laser.
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                     33

   The difference between the FP and the DFB laser in 2.12 (a, b) and 2.15 (a, b)
is the presence of the grating in the silicon. This introduces a compromise between
having a high gain (if the optical mode is confined to the active region) and a high
reflection (if the optical mode is confined to the grating region). In both the FP
and the DFB laser shown in Fig. 2.15 (a, b), a highly reflective mirror is placed
on the left side, to increase the optical feedback into the cavity.
   Fig. 2.15 (c) shows the schematic of VCSELs, very common type of lasers in
data centers. They are very popular and attractive due to their very low threshold
currents, and high power efficiency. As shown in Fig. 2.15 (c), and as suggested
by the name, the laser is a vertical resonator. In the configuration shown in Fig.
2.15 (c), highly reflective mirrors are placed both on the top and on the bottom of
the cavity. As VCSELs emit light vertically, they are not well suited for
integration with other components in a photonic integrated circuit. VCSELs also
used to have lower SMSR than DFB lasers, but nowadays there are
demonstrations with more than 30 and 50 dB SMSR [16–17].
  Finally, Fig. 2.15 (d) shows DBR laser diodes, which are similar to DFBs.
However, the gratings are now present outside of the active region. This type of
grating is useful for wavelength tuning.
   There have been many III-V-on-silicon laser diode demonstrations in the past
years. For example, transmission of 10 Gbps using microdisk lasers [18]. There
were also demonstrations of direct and electro-absorption modulation of DFB
lasers with modulation speed of 56 Gbps [19]. Wavelength tunable DFB lasers
with tuning range of 8 nm were also demonstrated [20]. Mode-locked lasers with
repetition rates of 1 GHz were reported in [21]. Quantum dot DFB lasers operating
at 1.3 µm with continuous wave lasing up to 100°C were also recently reported in
[22]. Finally, VCSELs operating at 850 nm and with a modulation speed of 25
Gbps were also demonstrated [16].

2.6      Monolithic versus heterogeneous III-V-on-Si
As already discussed in chapter 1, state of the art monolithic III-V devices have
superior performance over III-V-on-silicon devices. This is because such devices
have been around for longer, so the technology is more mature. Hereunder, we
briefly show the driver for III-V-on-silicon integration, but also discuss the
challenges.

2.6.1 Index contrast and optical confinement
  The refractive index contrast Δn betweem the core and cladding of the
waveguide, and the optical confinement to the waveguide are two interrelated key
factors to reduce the losses and create small footprint devices. For example, the
index contrast between the core (silicon, n = 3.5) and cladding (silicon oxide, n =
1.5) in a silicon platform is around 2.0 at 1550 nm. This results in very strong
optical confinement to the silicon waveguide, which allows low-loss compact
34                                                                         CHAPTER 2

devices. This is not the case in monolithic III-V devices, where the index contrast
in an InP/InGaAsP waveguide is below 0.5 at 1550 nm.

2.6.2 Grating coupling coefficient
  The grating coupling coefficient κ is a measure of the coupling strength
between the forward and backward propagating waves, and is given by [23]:

                         𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓,𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑 − 𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓,𝑒𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑
              κ = 2(                                 ) sin(𝑚𝜋𝐷)                    (2.8)
                                     𝜆𝐵

where neff, unetched and neff, etched are the effective indices in the unetched and etched
regions of the grating, respectively, and 𝐷 is the grating duty cycle. Due to the
high index contrast in III-V-on-silicon devices compared to the monolithic ones,
κ is higher. In monolithic III-V devices, κ can be in the order of 150 cm−1 [24],
while it can be as high as 1500 cm−1 for III-V-on-silicon [25].
  The grating coupling coefficient influences the direct modulation bandwidth.
For example, in a DFB laser, the higher the overlap between the light and the
grating, the higher the feedback, the lower the threshold current, and the higher
the modulation bandwidth. This is governed by:

                                          𝑑𝐺 (𝐼 − 𝐼𝑡ℎ )                            (2.9)
                          (2𝜋𝑓𝑟 )2 = 𝛤
                                          𝑑𝑁 𝑞𝑑𝑤𝐿

where 𝑓𝑟 is the relaxation oscillation frequency, Γ is the optical confinement
factor, dG/dN is the differential gain, I and 𝐼𝑡ℎ are the injected and threshold
current, respectively, q is the elementary charge, 𝑑, 𝑤, and 𝐿 are the thickness,
width, and length of the active region.




Figure 2.16: Confinement factor to the MQW (blue, hollow) and to the silicon waveguide
(red, bald) as a function of the silicon waveguide width and thickness (figure from [26]).
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                     35

   Although a high coupling coefficient is desired by confining the light to the
grating layer, confinement to the gain region is important to get enough optical
gain. In a III-V-on-silicon laser, the confinement factor to the MQW and the
silicon waveguide can be tuned by e.g. changing the silicon waveguide width, as
illustrated in Fig. 2.16 [26]. There, a compromise must be sought between optical
gain and feedback.
  The internal loss of a laser is another important parameter to take into account
when designing the optical confinement factor. To understand this, let’s introduce
the internal quantum efficiency 𝜂 of a laser, which is proportional to the internal
loss 𝛼0 and the mirror (i.e. grating) loss 𝛼𝑚𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 , as given by:

                                     𝛼𝑚𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟
                             𝜂~                                              (2.10)
                                   𝛼0 + 𝛼𝑚𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟

  There are different mechanisms responsible for the internal loss. The first
mechanism is scattering loss on the sidewalls of the III-V, which is mainly due to
the fabrication. Another mechanism is the intervalence band absorption (IVBA),
in which an emitted photon is reabsorbed by an electron transitioning between
two valence sub-bands. The third mechanism is metal absorption. As metal
contacts absorb light, they should be placed sufficiently far from the optical mode.
However, metal contacts need to be as close as possible to decrease the series
resistance.
  We have shown that if the light is confined in III-V waveguides, it undergoes
different internal loss mechanisms. The optical losses in silicon waveguides, on
the other hand, are very low. Therefore, a compromise between optical gain in III-
V waveguides and low loss in silicon waveguides is sought.

2.6.3 Thermal challenges
  There remains one main challenge for demonstrated III-V-on-silicon devices:
heating. In such devices, a layer of 10–100 nm of divinylsiloxane-bis-
benzocyclobutene (DVS-BCB), or BCB for short, is used to bond the III-V to the
SOI. The SOI consists of a 2 µm thick buried oxide (BOX) layer, which sits below
the 400 nm silicon waveguide. Both are carried on a thick silicon substrate layer,
as shown in the cross section in Fig. 2.17. The thermal conductivities for these
materials are 1.1 and 0.3 W/m⋅K, respectively, which are poor. Therefore, they
prevent heat from sinking into the silicon substrate. On the other hand, as there is
no BCB or buried oxide layer in monolithic InP devices, the heat can leak more
easily into the InP substrate, which has a thermal conductivity of 68 W/m⋅K.
  The effect of heating is evident, especially in short III-V-on-silicon devices.
Heating can limit the maximum output optical power. Our most power efficient
laser [27] still has lower output optical power compared to the monolithic laser in
[28] (2.9 versus 4.5 mW at I = 35 mA). This is the case even though the laser in
[28] is three-fold shorter than the one in [27] (50 versus 150 µm), which normally
causes faster thermal roll-off.
36                                                                          CHAPTER 2




Figure 2.17: Cross section of the laser structure showing possible heat sink challenges due
to the thick buried oxide layer

2.7       Fabrication of III-V-on-silicon DFB laser diodes
2.7.1 Process flow
For a good understanding of this work, the technology behind the presented
devices needs to be discussed. As discussed in chapter 1, the potential of silicon
photonics for high volume production at low cost makes it attractive for
commercial applications. However, efficient light generation cannot be achieved
using only silicon, due to its indirect bandgap [29]. The need for light sources on
silicon has triggered an extensive investigation of III-V-on-silicon integration [1].
The technology of such a platform is based on integrating III-V epitaxial layer
structures on top of patterned SOI waveguide circuits. As discussed in chapter 1,
adhesive bonding relaxes the cleanliness requirements compared to direct
bonding, solves the issue of the lattice mismatch in hetero-epitaxial growth, and
allows high density integration compared to the flip-chip technique. Therefore,
adhesive bonding is the technique of choice in this work.
   The fabrication procedure is standard and well established in the photonics
research group [12, 20, 30]. The SOI fabrication normally takes place at IMEC
(e.g. the devices shown in chapter 3). We can also fabricate SOI circuits ourselves
using electron beam lithography (e-beam or EBL) at Ghent University (e.g. the
devices shown in chapter 4). The silicon waveguides and gratings are patterned
on a 400 nm thick silicon wafer, with a 180 nm etch step. Bonding and post-
processing took place in our cleanroom facilities. The process flow is illustrated
in the schematic in Fig. 2.18 (a–i). The fabrication starts by bonding an InP-based
die (7 mm2) comprising the epitaxial layer structure epi-side-down onto an SOI
die (2 cm2), as shown in Fig. 2.15 (a, b). The typically used adhesive bonding
agent to ‘glue’ the epi die on top of the SOI is BCB. Given that the SOI surface
does not contain particles of the size of the bonding layer (10–100 nm), a bonding
yield close to 100% can be achieved.
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                        37




(a)                          (b)                           (c)




(d)                          (e)                           (f)




(g)                          (h)
                                                           (i)




Figure 2.18: Cross-section schematic summarizing the process flow, starting from (a, b)
bonding, going through (c–f) etching the different layers, (g) BCB planarization, (h)
etching the openings (vias), and finally ending with (i) contact pads deposition.

   After bonding, the layers are etched one after another, to create the pattern
shown in Fig. 2.18 (f). This is done using a few iterations of Silicon Nitride (SiN)
deposition and photolithography to create hard masks (SiN) and soft masks
(photoresists), in combination with some steps of dry and wet etching. First, the
thick InP substrate (not shown) is removed, using HCl:H2O (1:3). Then, the p-
InGaAs layer is etched using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching, as
shown in Fig. 2.18 (c). Then, the p-InP layer is etched using HCl:H2O (1:1), as
shown in Fig. 2.18 (d). After that, the InGaAsP layer is etched using a combination
of ICP and H2SO4:H2O2:H2O (1:1:20), as shown in Fig. 2.18 (e). Care should be
taken to remove the whole InGaAsP layer and reach a clean n-InP interface, to
have a successful n-contact metal deposition. Finally, the n-InP layer is etched
using HCl:H2O (1:1) to create the island shown in Fig. 2.18 (f), to separate
different devices and to open the grating couplers. N-contacts containing
38                                                                     CHAPTER 2

Ni:Ge:Au (30 nm : 20 nm : 50 nm) are deposited at this step on the n-InP, as
shown in Fig. 2.18 (f).
   Once the devices are patterned, planarization using SiN and BCB is done. The
BCB is etched back to the level of the first layer (p-InGaAs). Then, p-contacts are
deposited, as shown in Fig. 2.18 (g). These consist of Ti:Au (40 nm:150 nm).
Once that is done, openings (vias) through the BCB are patterned and etched by
reactive ion etching (RIE), as shown in Fig. 2.18 (h). In the end, final metal contact
pads that connect to the n- and p-contacts are deposited, as shown in Fig. 2.18 (i).
The 3D view of the device is shown in Fig. 2.19, without showing the BCB and
final contacts for simplicity.




Figure 2.19: Schematic showing the 3D view of the laser structure.

   The top view of an actual working device, as well as a cross section image using
a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and focused ion beam (FIB) are shown in
Fig. 2.20 (a, b). By largely removing the planarizing oxide on top of the silicon, a
very thin bonding layer of around 10 nm is obtained. It is important to point out
that the V-shape in Fig. 2.18 (f), and in Fig. 2.20 (b) is a result of the crystal
orientation dependent wet-etching of p-InP, which gives an angle to the structure.
Fortunately, this helps with the optical confinement in the III-V/silicon
waveguide. The unfortunate mistake of a 90° rotation of the III-V sample before
bonding would result in a pyramid shape crystal etching, which would result in
lower optical confinement and poor performance. It is also worth mentioning that
there are two sacrificial layers (not shown) on both sides of the epi, to protect the
layers from contamination. These are required to be removed directly before
fabrication.
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                      39




                     (a)




                  (b)




Figure 2.20: Schematic showing (a) the top view and (b) the cross section image of an
actual device using SEM and FIB.

  Moreover, it is noticeable that in the actual device (Fig. 2.20 (b)), the quantum
wells are wide, unlike in the schematic in Fig. 2.18 (e). Both wide and narrow
quantum wells have advantages and disadvantages. The wide quantum wells are
useful to reduce the surface recombination at the side walls in case of InGaAsP
quantum wells. In case of InAlGaAs, wide quantum wells are useful to reduce the
optical losses caused by the oxidation of the side-walls. No surface treatment is
required for wide quantum wells, which makes the fabrication easier. The
disadvantage is the increased device volume, which increases the threshold
current and reduces the modulation bandwidth.
  On the other hand, narrow quantum wells are advantageous because they reduce
the device volume, which decreases the threshold current and increases the
modulation bandwidth. However, in aluminium-containing quantum wells, it is
essential for the side walls to be carefully treated.
  Wide InGaAsP layers consisting of six QWs are used in chapter 3 to investigate
two-section lasers, due to the ease of fabrication. On the other hand, narrow
InAlGaAs layers consisting of eight QWs are used in chapter 4, because they have
more QWs and a higher conduction band offset.
40                                                                        CHAPTER 2


2.7.2 Optical design and fabrication issues
  To understand the operation of our DFB laser diodes, it is essential to look at
the mode profile shown in the cross section in Fig. 2.21. This shows a hybrid
mode between the silicon and the III-V waveguides. The optical mode is defined
by the effective index neff of the waveguide structure. This optical mode
experiences both optical feedback (DFB gratings) and optical gain (quantum
wells), but also optical loss due to e.g. sidewall roughness. Using double adiabatic
tapers (i.e. both in the III-V and in the silicon waveguides), the optical mode
shown in Fig. 2.21 (in the middle of the taper) can be coupled down to the 400
nm thick silicon waveguide. The top and side views, along with the cross section
are shown in Fig. 2.22 [31–33]. After coupling to the silicon waveguide, the light
couples to an optical fiber using surface grating couplers.




Figure 2.21: The mode profile taking into account the V-shape


      X
  Y




Figure 2.22: Double adiabatic tapers used to couple the light from the III-V waveguide to
the silicon waveguide (figure from [31]).
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                        41

   The light confinement to the quantum well layer and to the silicon are referred
to as the confinement factor ΓQW and ΓSi, respectively. The bonding thickness (10–
100 nm) plays a role in determining these two quantities, and thus determining
the performance of the device, as shown in Fig. 2.23 [12] for a rectangular III-V
mesa. Large BCB thickness results in high confinement to the MQW, while small
BCB thickness results in high confinement to the silicon waveguide.




Figure 2.23: Simulation showing the confinement factor in the quantum well ΓQW and in
the silicon waveguides ΓSi versus the BCB bonding thickness (figure from [12]).

  The quality of the taper (in Fig. 2.24), especially at the tip, is very important for
maximum light coupling from the III-V to the silicon waveguides. A good taper
looks like the one in Fig. 2.24 (a), where the colors are uniform. Throughout the
fabrication process, tapers can be damaged, bent or split (Fig. 2.24 (b–d)), or even
completely peeled off. This is usually a result of issues in the lithography and
etching processes.

      (a)                                     (b)




      (c)                                     (d)




Figure 2.24: Microscopic image showing (a) a good taper with uniform colors, (b) a
damaged taper, (c) a bent taper, and (d) a split taper.
42                                                                     CHAPTER 2




              Transmission




                                   Taper length (µm)

Figure 2.25: Simulation showing the effect of taper misalignment on the optical output
power for different taper lengths with a 500 nm taper tip and 80 nm bonding thickness
(figure from [32]).

   Taper damage is not the only concern during fabrication. Lateral misalignment
between the III-V and the silicon waveguides is a challenging parameter to control
during fabrication. A misalignment of around 200 – 300 nm is common during
the optical lithography process. The effect of this misalignment is illustrated in
the simulation in Fig. 2.25 [32], by showing the transmission as a function of the
taper length for different misalignment values (denoted as y). This was done for
a taper tip width of 500 nm and bonding thickness of 80 nm. High misalignment
results in lower optical output power, especially for short taper lengths. Moreover,
there is an ongoing work to minimize the effect of misalignment and allow up to
1 µm alignment tolerance using a novel taper design, while still being compact
(225 µm) by [34].
  Throughout the thesis, a taper length of 180 µm is often used. However, Fig.
2.25 predicts that for a bonding thickness of 80 nm and a misalignment of 190
nm, it is possible to get 100% transmission for a taper length of less than 150 µm.
This is attempted in chapter 4, where a 150 µm taper is fabricated for electro-
absorption modulation.

2.8      III-V epitaxial layer structures used in this work
Three epitaxial layer structures were used in this work. The first one has an active
medium of InGaAsP (6 quantum wells), and is used in chapter 3. The second one
has an active medium of InAlGaAs (8 quantum wells), and is used in chapter 4.
The third one is similar to the second one, but it contains 10 InAlGaAs quantum
wells instead of 8, and is used in chapter 5.
  The InAlGaAs stacks were more suitable for the demonstration of high-speed
electro-absorption modulated DFB laser diodes (chapter 4) due to their superior
performance compared to InGaAsP (as discussed in section 2.3), and the higher
number of quantum wells.
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                    43

  On the other hand, the InGaAsP stack was used to develop new devices based
on two-section laser structures (chapter 3), due to its ease of fabrication. The
normalized photoluminescence spectrum of the InGaAsP (6 quantum wells) stack
and the InAlGaAs (8 quantum wells) stack are shown in Fig. 2.26 (a, b). The
parameters of the three layer stacks are summarized in Table 2.1–3.



       (a)                                       (b)




Figure 2.26: Normalized photoluminescence spectrum of (a) InGaAsP (6 quantum wells)
and (b) InAlGaAs (8 quantum wells) epitaxial layer structure.
44         CHAPTER 2




     NID
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES   45




              -




        NID   NID
46       CHAPTER 2




     >
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                           47


2.9      Conclusion
In this chapter, the basic concepts of laser operation and fabrication were
discussed. First, we have outlined the basics of DFB laser diodes. Then,
monolithic III-V and heterogeneously integrated III-V-on-silicon laser diodes
were described. After that, a comparison between different types of laser diodes
was given. Finally, the fabrication procedure and the epitaxial layer structures
used in this work were summarized.

References
[1] D. Liang and John E. Bowers, “Recent progress in lasers on silicon,” Nature Photonics,
4, pp. 511–517, (2010).

[2] M. Isshiki and J. Wang, “Wide-Bandgap II-VI Semiconductors: Growth and
Properties.” In: S. Kasap and P. Capper, Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic
Materials, (2017).

[3] N. Grote, M. Mohrle, and M. Ortsiefer, “Laser components,” In: H. Venghaus, N.
Grote, “Fiber Optic Communication: Key devices,” Springer, (2017).

[4] X. Li, “Optoelectronic devices,” Cambridge University Press, (2009).

[5] M. Kondow, K. Uomi, A. Niwa, T. Kitatani, S. Watahiki, and Y. Yazawa, “GaInNAs:
A novel material for long-wavelength-range laser diodes with excellent high-temperature
performance,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 35, pp. 1273–1275, (1996).

[6] H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank. “Stimulated emission in a periodic structure,” Applied
Physics Letters, 18(4), pp. 152–154, (1971).

[7] H. Kogelnik and C. V. Shank, “Coupled-wave theory of distributed feedback lasers,”
Journal of Applied Physics, 43(5), pp. 2327–2335, (1972).

[8] M. Nakamura, A. Yariv, H. W. Yen, S. Somekh, and H. L. Garvin, “Optically pumped
GaAs surface laser with corrugation feedback,” Applied Physics Letters, 22(10), pp. 515–
516, (1973).

[9] C. V. Shank, R. V. Schmidt, and B. I. Miller, “Double-heterostructure GaAs
distributed-feedback laser,” Applied Physics Letters, 25(4), pp. 200–201, (1974).

[10] D. R. Scifres, R. D. Burnham, and W. Streifer, “Distributed-feedback single
heterojunction GaAs diode laser,” Applied Physics Letters, 25(4), pp. 203–206, (1974).

[11] M. Nakamura, K. Aiki, J.Umeda, A. Yariv, H.W. Yen, and T.Morikawa, “GaAs- Ga1-
x AlxAs double-heterostructure distributed-feedback diode lasers,” Applied Physics
Letters, 25(9), pp. 487–488, (1974).
[12] A. Abbasi, “High speed directly modulated III-V-on-Silicon DFB lasers,” Doctoral
thesis, Ghent University, (2016).
48                                                                        CHAPTER 2

[13] G. Morthier and P. Vankwikelberge, “Handbook of distributed feedback laser diodes”
Artech house, (2014).

[14] G. P. Agrawal, J. E. Geusic, and P. J. Anthony, “Distributed feedback lasers with
multiple phase-shift regions,” Applied Physics Letters, 53(3), pp. 178–179 (1988).

[15] Y. Shi, X. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Li, L. Li, and Y. Feng, “Experimental demonstration of
the three phase shifted DFB semiconductor laser based on Reconstruction-Equivalent-
Chirp technique,” Optics Express, 20(16), (2012).

[16] S. Kumari, “GaAs VCSEL Integration on SiN Waveguide Circuits: Design,
Technology and Devices,” Doctoral thesis, Ghent University, (2016).

[17] D. M. Kuchta, T. N. Huynh, F. E. Doany, L. Schares, C. W. Baks, C. Neumeyr, A.
Daly, B. Kogel, J. Rosskopf, and M. Ortsiefer, “Error-free 56 Gb/s NRZ Modulation of a
1530-nm VCSEL Link,” Journal of lightwave technology, 34(14), pp. 3275–3282, (2016).

[18] G. Morthier, T. Spuesens, P. Mechet, G. Roelkens, D. Van Thourhout, “InP microdisk
lasers integrated on Si for Optical Interconnects,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics , 21(6), p. 1500610, (2015).

[19] A. Abbasi, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G.-H. Duan, G.
Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Direct and electro-absorption modulation of a III-V-on-silicon
DFB laser at 56 Gbps,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 23(6), p.
1501307, (2017).

[20] S. Dhoore, “Heterogeneously Integrated III-V-on-Silicon Wavelength-Tunable DFB
and DBR Lasers,” Doctoral thesis, Ghent University, (2018).

[21] K. Van Gasse, L. Bogaert, L. Breyne, J. Van Kerrebrouck, S. Dhoore, C. Op de Beeck,
A. Katumba, C.Y. Wu, H. Li, J. Verbist, A. Rahim, A. Abbasi, B. Moeneclaey, Z. Wang,
H. Chen, J. Van Campenhout, X. Yin, B. Kuyken, G. Morthier, J. Bauwelinck, G. Torfs,
G. Roelkens, “Analog radio-over-fiber transceivers based on III-V-on-silicon photonics,”
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 30(21), pp.1818–1821, (2018).

[22] S. Uvin, S. Kumari, A. De Groote, S. Verstuyft, G. Lepage, P. Verheyen, J. Van
Campenhout, G. Morthier, D. Van Thourhout, and G. Roelkens, “1.3 um InAs/GaAs
quantum dot DFB laser integrated on a Si waveguide circuit by means of adhesive die-to-
wafer bonding,” Optics Express, 26(14), pp. 18302–18309, (2018).

[23] L. A. Coldren, S. W. Corzine, and M. L. Mashanovitch, Diode lasers and photonic
integrated circuits, 218, (John Wiley & Sons, 2012).

[24] G. Zhao, J. Sun, Y. Xi, D. Gao, Q. Lu, and W. Guo, “Design and simulation of two-
section DFB lasers with short active-section lengths,” Optics Express, 24(10), pp. 10590–
10598, (2016).
[25] S. Matsuo and T. Kakitsuka, “Low-operating-energydirectly modulated lasers for
short-distance optical interconnects,” Advances in Optics and Photonics 10(3), pp. 567–
643, (2018).

[26] X. Luo, Y. Cao, J. Song, X. Hu, Y. Cheng, C. Li, C. Liu, T-Y. Liow, M. Yu, H. Wang,
Q. J. Wang, P. G-Q Lo, “High-throughput multiple dies-to-wafer bonding technology and
OVERVIEW OF DFB LASER DIODES                                                              49

III/V-on-Si hybrid lasers for heterogeneous integration of optoelectronic integrated
circuits,” Frontiers in Materials, 2(28), (2015).

[27] M. Shahin, J. Van Kerrebrouck, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “InP-on-Si DFB Laser
Diode with Distributed Reflector for Improved Power Efficiency,” European Conference
on Integrated Optics (ECIO), (2019).

[28] Y. Matsui, R. Schatz, T. Pham, W. A. Ling, G. Carey, H. M. Daghighian, D. Adams,
T. Sudo, and C. Roxlo, “55 GHz Bandwidth Distributed Reflector Laser,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 35(3), pp. 397–403, (2017).

[29] R. Soref, “The past, present, and future of silicon photonics,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, 12(6), pp. 1678–1687, (2006).

[30] G. Roelkens, A. Abbasi, P. Cardile, U.D. Dave, A. De Groote, Y. De Koninck, S.
Dhoore, X. Fu, A. Gassenq, N. Hattasan, Q. Huang, S. Kumari, S. Keyvaninia, B. Kuyken,
L. Li, P. Mechet, M. Muneeb, D. Sanchez, H. Shao, T. Spuesens, A. Subramanian, S. Uvin,
M. Tassaert, K. Van Gasse, J. Verbist, R. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Van Campenhout,
Y. Xin, J. Bauwelinck, G. Morthier, R. Baets, D. Van Thourhout, “III-V-on-silicon
photonic devices for optical communication and sensing,” Photonics (invited), 2(3), pp.
969–1004, (2015).

[31] M. Lamponi, S. Keyvaninia, C. Jany, F. Poingt, F. Lelarge, G. de Valicourt, G.
Roelkens, D. Van Thourhout, S. Messaoudene, J.M. Fedeli, G.H. Duan, “low-threshold
heteroogeneously integrated InP/SOI laser with a double adiabatic taper coupler,”
Photonics Technoloy Letters, 24(1), pp. 76–78, (2012).

[32] D. Van Thourhout, S. Keyvaninia, G. Roelkens, M. Lamponi, F. Lelarge, J.-M. Fedeli,
S. Messaoudene, G. D. Duan, “Optimization of taper structures for III-V on silicon lasers,”
International Conference on Solid State Devices and Materials, pp. 524–525, (2012).

[33] S. Dhoore, S. Uvin, D. Van Thourhout, G. Morthier, G. Roelkens, “Novel adiabatic
tapered couplers for active III-V/SOI devices fabricated through transfer printing,” Optics
Express, 24(12), pp. 12976–12990, (2016).

[34] B. Haq, G. Roelkens, “Alignment-tolerant taper design for transfer printed III-V-on-
Si devices,” European Conference on Integrated Optics (ECIO), p. T.Po2.1, (2019).
3 Two-section DFB laser diodes
                                                                     3
In this chapter, we report on the design, fabrication, and characterization of III-
V-on-silicon two-section DFB laser diodes, and how their specific characteristics
were employed for three different functions. These are: (1) self-pulsating lasers,
(2) bandwidth-enhanced lasers, and (3) low-threshold lasers.

Contents
        3.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 51
        3.2 Self-pulsating DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 52
        3.3 Bandwidth-enhanced DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 64
        3.4 Low-threshold DFB laser diodes ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 72
        3.5 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 81
        References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 85


3.1 Introduction
A big part of this work is aimed at the development of heterogeneously integrated
III-V-on-silicon two-section DFB laser diodes for different functions. This type
of lasers is interesting because of the ability to bias the laser sections
independently from the other. This leads to the possibility of controlling the lasing
and reflection condition in each section, and use the device for different functions.
The design, fabrication, and characterization of two-section lasers were first done
for self-pulsating laser diodes. The beating of the laser lines, among other
mechanisms, can be useful to generate an optical microwave carrier at a certain
frequency determined by the beating laser lines. This can be used in microwave
photonics, applied in e.g. radio-over-fiber systems. The same laser configuration
with different biasing can be used for bandwidth enhancement of direct
modulation of the equivalent standard single-section laser configuration, using the


                                         51
52                                                                       CHAPTER 3


photon-photon resonance. Finally, by biasing only one section, and using the other
section as a reflector, the laser threshold and power consumption can be lowered.
The experimental findings for each function are described in detail in the next
sections.
   Before that, it would be useful to point out the fabrication differences from the
standard laser fabrication procedure summarized in chapter 2 [1–3]. Initially, the
proposed devices are fabricated as a standard single-section DFB laser. Later, by
the end of the fabrication process, an isolation etch takes place, by wet etching the
top p-InGaAs contact layer using H2SO4:H2O2:H2O (1:1:18), and dry etching 200–
500 nm of the p-InP layer using ICP. Fig. 3.1 shows the top view of a 14 m long
etched electrical isolation between two laser sections with different III-V width
(hereafter called mesa width). The devices presented in this chapter are based on
the InGaAsP/InP epitaxial layer stack presented in chapter 2.




      Left section         Electrical isolation            Right section

Figure 3.1: Top view of a two-section laser diode with different mesa widths, showing a
14 m long electrical isolation

  The laser diodes for each of the three functions will be discussed in the
following three sections. Each time, the literature will be reviewed first, followed
by the design parameters, and the experimental results. Finally, a summary of the
research findings, and a comparison to the state of the art are given.

3.2      Self-pulsating DFB laser diodes
The increased importance of radio-over-fiber systems has triggered a lot of
interest in optical microwave signals [4–5]. One way to generate such signals is
by using self-pulsating laser diodes. In this section, we demonstrate self-pulsating
two-section DFB laser diodes on the III-V-on-silicon platform. The chapter starts
with a review of the literature and a discussion of the state of the art. Then, the
design of the laser structure is discussed. After that, the static laser characteristics
are shown, followed by the characteristics of the free-running (unlocked) self-
pulsation. Finally, locking the self-pulsation to an external RF signal is discussed.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                      53


3.2.1 Literature review and state-of-the-art
Self-pulsating DFB laser diodes have been described in literature since the early
1990s. At that time, these were mainly used for all-optical clock extraction or
recovery. Two-section DFB laser diodes for 5 GHz [6], 10 GHz [7], 20 GHz [8],
and 40 GHz [9] clock recovery were successfully demonstrated. Theoretically,
self-pulsations with repetition frequencies up to 200 GHz are theoretically
possible [10], although it is challenging to experimentally verify. These
demonstrations were all based on monolithic III-V laser diodes.
   Nowadays, the increased importance of radio-over-fiber systems has generated
a strong interest in the generation of optical microwave or millimeter wave
carriers [4]. These are sinusoidal waves with a sub-nanosecond period. There are
a few approaches for the generation of such optical signals: mode-locked lasers,
self-pulsating lasers, and external modulation. Self-pulsating DFB lasers have the
advantage that their repetition frequency is not fixed by the cavity length as in
mode-locked lasers. The repetition frequency or frequency separation Δ𝑣 between
two modes in mode-locked lasers is given by:

                                          𝑐                                   (3.1)
                                 Δ𝑣 =
                                        2𝐿 𝑛𝑔

where 𝑐 is the speed of light, 𝑛𝑔 is the group index of the laser mode, and 𝐿 is the
optical cavity length.
   The repetition rate in mode-locked lasers is highly dependent on the optical
cavity length. Obtaining a high repetition rate is easily done by fabricating a small
laser. However, obtaining low repetition rates is more challenging, since a very
long laser cavity is required. For example, a monolithic InP and a heterogeneously
integrated InP-on-silicon mode-locked laser with repetition rates of 2.5 and 1
GHz, respectively, were demonstrated in [11–12]. However, the cavities were as
long as 33 and 37.4 mm, respectively. Although long cavities are not desired, they
are easy to achieve in silicon using spiral waveguides [12]. The real disadvantage
here is that the repetition rates are fixed and cannot be changed.
   On the other hand, the repetition rate in self-pulsating laser diodes does not
depend on the cavity length. Also, the repetition rate can be continuously tuned
as will be explained throughout this chapter. Both self-pulsating and mode-locked
lasers can be locked to a weak RF signal. Using this locking, an optical RF signal
with very narrow linewidth could be generated with minimal RF power [13].
Finally, direct and external modulation can also be used to generate such a signal.
However, the bandwidth of direct modulation is limited, while external
modulation adds an extra insertion loss and increases the complexity of the
system.
  DFB lasers that consist of two or three sections are common for the
demonstration of self-pulsating lasers [14–16]. Self-pulsations are mainly
54                                                                          CHAPTER 3


attributed to three mechanisms [17–18]: spatial hole burning, beating-type
oscillations, and dispersive self-Q-switching.
   Spatial hole burning refers to a perturbation in the carrier concentration. This
mechanism was discussed several times in the literature [19–22]. The change in
carrier concentration would induce a gain and refractive index difference
throughout the laser. When the loss of the laser mode at a certain wavelength
increases, mode hopping occurs. This means that another laser mode with less
loss starts to operate. After some recovery time, the loss of the original mode
decreases, and the laser hops back to the original mode. This repetition causes a
train of pulses with a certain repetition rate. One noticeable effect of this
mechanism is (longitudinal) multi-mode behavior. The repetition rate of self-
pulsations due to spatial hole burning is limited by the relaxation oscillation
frequency and is therefore limited to just several GHz [19].
   The second mechanism for generating self-pulsations is to cause the beating of
two laser modes [17]. This mechanism relies on simple beating between two DFB
modes that are spectrally close to each other, to generate a beat frequency equal
to the separation between the modes. High repetition frequencies up to 100 GHz
were obtained in the literature [17].
   The third mechanism is self-Q-switching [23–25]. In this case, the stop-bands
of the two laser sections should overlap, such that one section acts as a reflector
for the lasing mode of the other section. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.2 [17], in
which the lasing wavelength of one section lies on the negative reflection slope
of the other section. At this point, the threshold of the lasing mode is strongly
dependent on the wavelength of operation, since the different wavelengths have
different reflectivities at the negative slope. If the reflectivity is high, the photon
density increases, while the carrier density decreases. This causes an increase in
the refractive index which redshifts the lasing wavelength, and switches the laser
off. When the laser is off, the photon density decreases, while the carrier density
increases. This causes a decrease in the refractive index, which blueshifts the
lasing wavelength, allowing the laser to operate again. The repetition of this
process creates a train of short pulses.




Figure 3.2: Illustration showing the self-Q-switching mechanism that happens when the
lasing mode of one section lies on the negative reflection slope of the other section [17].
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                         55


  Table 3.1 summarizes the characteristics of each mechanism. Spatial-hole-
burning oscillations are characterized by their multi-mode behavior, with limited
pulsation frequencies. Beating is also characterized by its multi-mode behavior,
but with the possibility of high pulsation frequencies. Finally, self-Q-switching is
usually characterized by the overlapping of two stop-bands, single mode behavior,
and the possibility of high repetition frequencies.

Table 3.1: Summary of self-pulsation mechanisms and their properties
  Self-pulsation type         Mode            Frequencies              References
 Spatial hole burning      Multi-mode       Low (< few GHz)              [19–21]
        Beating            Multi-mode       High (> few GHz)               [18]
   Self-Q-switching        Single-mode      High (> few GHz)           [17, 23–25]

   So far, all reported self-pulsating laser diodes were implemented as monolithic
III-V laser diodes. In this work, we report on the design, fabrication, and
characterization of self-pulsating heterogeneously integrated III-V-on-SOI two-
section DFB laser diodes. We demonstrate tunable repetition frequencies over a
broad range by variation of current and temperature. Finally, we also report on the
locking of the self-pulsation to a low power electrical RF signal, which can be
used for the generation of optical microwave carriers with very narrow linewidth.

3.2.2 Design
In the beginning, we were aiming to exploit the self-Q-switching mechanism. For
that, the proposed lasers require two sections with different Bragg wavelengths,
which can be implemented through different modal effective indices. In principle,
changing one parameter in one section compared to the other can induce such an
effect. For example, the period of the grating or the mesa width of the III-V laser
structure. We choose to design the two sections with different mesa widths [26],
since the available SOI chips did not have DFBs with different grating periods
within one laser cavity. If the widths are chosen correctly, the stop-bands of the
two sections overlap. This has the potential to induce the self-Q-switching effect
shown in Fig. 3.2. Fig. 3.3 (a–c) shows the 3D, top and side view of the proposed
structure. The two sections are electrically isolated by etching the top p-InGaAs
layer and part of the p-InP layer. Tuning the current into the laser sections can be
used to shift the stop-bands.
  We will investigate two laser devices (Laser A and laser B), with slightly
different mesa widths. The mesa width for the right and left sections, respectively,
are: Laser A: 4, 2 μm, Laser B: 4, 2.5 μm. The choice of these parameters was
based on the optical mode simulation of the structure in Fig. 3.4 (a). This
simulation shows the relationship between mesa width and effective index in Fig.
3.4 (b). For example, the choice of Laser A (4, 2 μm) would give Δne ≈ 0.01. The
difference between the Bragg wavelengths of the two sections Δλ with grating
period of 𝛬 is given by:
56                                                                          CHAPTER 3


                                   Δ𝜆 = 2Δ𝑛𝑒 𝛬                                       (3.2)

   For example, for 𝛬 = 240 nm and Δne ≈ 0.02, Δλ ≈ 4 nm. Since the stop-bands
of similar lasers were reported to be 4 nm [27–28], this design would make it
possible for the stop-bands to overlap, which induces self-Q-switching. To gain
an insight into the behavior of the laser with different parameters, Laser B, having
slightly different mesa widths (4, 2.5 μm), is also investigated. The width of the
quantum well, n-InP and silicon waveguide are 9, 50 and 1.75 μm, respectively.


  (a)                                             (b)




                                                  (c)




Figure 3.3: (a) 3D, (b) top, and (c) side view of a two-section DFB laser, with different
mesa widths, electrically isolated by dry etching.


  (a)




                                                                                     (b)



Figure 3.4: Optical mode simulation of the structure in (a), showing (b) the effective index
versus the mesa width. Δne ≈ 0.02 is estimated for Laser A with mesa widths (4, 2 μm).

   The mesa width value in Fig. 3.4 refers to the mesa width at the top p-InGaAs
layer. As previously discussed, the crystal dependent etching of p-InP gives an
angle (V-shape) to the structure. Fig. 3.5 shows an SEM image of the cross section
after using FIB of an actual laser structure.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                        57




Figure 3.5: SEM image of the cross section of the fabricated device obtained using FIB,
showing the V-shape caused by crystal orientation dependent p-InP wet etching.

  In the proposed device, each section has a length of 460 μm. This includes a
230 μm long DFB section acting as a laser, and a 230 μm long pumped taper
acting as an amplifier. The grating defined in the silicon waveguide layer is 180
nm etched, has a period of 240 nm, and has a duty cycle of 50%. Finally, a quarter-
wave (λ/4) phase shift is placed in the middle of the cavity.

3.2.3 Static laser characteristics
The demonstrated lasers have a threshold current of 2 × 12 mA (i.e. 12 mA in
each section). Fig. 3.6 shows the output power coupled out from the left grating
coupler versus the current in the left section IL (a) and in the right section IR (b)
for Laser B (Laser A shows a similar trend). The current into the other section is
fixed at 10 or 50 mA. The series resistance is around 10 Ω, slightly lower (9 Ω)
for the wider right section and slightly larger (11 Ω) for the narrower left section.
The resistance between the two sections is measured to be 13 kΩ.
   The illustrated power curves correspond to power measurements in the
waveguide, extracted from the left grating coupler. The grating coupler loss is
around 8 dB near 1550 nm. The grating coupler loss is determined by sending an
optical signal at the desired wavelength over a straight waveguide with two
grating couplers (input and output grating couplers). In Fig. 3.6 (a), the current is
injected into the narrow left mesa section. Although lasing already occurs for I R
= 50 mA, the left section acts as a reflector/absorber, and no light is detected from
the left grating coupler before biasing the left section. The lower threshold current
in the red curve is attributed to the high current in the right section I R = 50 mA.
   Fig. 3.6 (b) shows different behavior. Since the light is detected from the left
side, the optical power levels at low IR values are already high for IL = 50 mA,
compared to IL = 10 mA. It can also be seen that the blue curves show an upward
trend in the optical power compared to the red curves under high injected currents.
This can be associated with heating, due to high injected current, which decreases
the output optical power.
  To analyze the operation of such lasers, the first step is to run a two-dimensional
sweep (i.e. to sweep IR and IL), to find the current combinations that allow self-
58                                                                               CHAPTER 3


pulsation operation. This is done first for Laser B. In this case, we have found that
at the current combination IL = 32 mA and IR = 35 mA, a self-pulsation signal at
40 GHz is generated (to be shown in the next section). The second step is to use
these current combinations and plot the individual stop-band spectrum of each
section. This is done by biasing one section close to threshold (12 mA), while the
other section is biased at the respective self-pulsation current. For example, for
the 40 GHz self-pulsation signal, the following current combinations are
considered: (1) IL = 32 mA, IR = 12 mA and (2) IL = 12 mA, IR = 35 mA. Fig. 3.7
(a) shows the optical spectrum, where the 5 nm stop-bands of the right and left
section (hereby denoted as SBR and SBL, respectively) are almost overlapping.




      (a)                                             (b)




Figure 3.6: Optical output power in the waveguide (left grating coupler) versus the current
into (a) the left section IL and (b) the right section IR for Laser B. The current into the other
section was fixed at 10 or 50 mA.




                   (a)                                             (b)




Figure 3.7: Optical spectra (power in the waveguide) showing (a) the 5 nm stop-bands
(SBL and SBR) in laser B, for the left and right section, respectively, are almost overlapping,
when the other section is biased close to threshold, and (b) two peaks spaced by 0.31 nm
are produced, which corresponds to 38.75 GHz.

   If biased by the current combination that allows the overlapping of the two stop-
bands, two laser lines spaced by 0.31 nm appear in Fig. 3.7 (b). This corresponds
to a beat frequency of 38.75 GHz (to be shown in the next section). Since the stop-
band overlap of the lasers is visible, the mechanism of operation of this laser is
suspected to be self-Q-switching. However, it is noticed that both lasers are lasing,
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                            59


whereas self-Q-switching (shown in Fig. 3.2) has only one laser section lasing,
and the other one is biased close to transparency and acts as a reflector. Due to the
complex structure, determining the mechanism of operation is not trivial.
  As discussed earlier, stop-band manipulation is not the only mechanism to
generate self-pulsation signals. Self-pulsation can also occur in the presence of
any two peaks spaced by a certain wavelength, without having the stop-bands of
the two sections to overlap. This was referred to previously as beating-type self-
pulsations. The optical spectra in Fig. 3.8 (a, c) are for Laser A, for two different
current combinations (IL = 45 mA, IR = 19 mA) and (IL = 43 mA, IR = 23 mA). In
those situations, two laser lines are generated, spaced by 0.096 and 0.204 nm,
which corresponds to the generation of self-pulsation signals at 12 and 25.5 GHz,
as shown in Fig. 3.8 (b, d).



                                   (a)               (b)




                                   (c)                (d)




Figure 3.8: Optical spectra showing (a, c) beating-type self-pulsations in Laser A with a
multi-mode behavior leading to (b, d) the generation of two laser lines spaced by 0.096
and 0.204 nm, which corresponds to self-pulsation signals with repetition rates of 12.5 and
25.5 GHz. The optical power shown is the power in the waveguide.

  Since (1) the stop-bands of the two laser sections are not visible, (2) the laser
exhibits a multi-mode behavior, and (3) the pulsation frequencies are high (> few
GHz), the mechanism of operation is beating, according to Table 3.1. Using an
optical filter, the unwanted modes can be easily filtered out.
60                                                                         CHAPTER 3


3.2.4 Unlocked self-pulsation characteristics
In this section, the self-pulsation characteristics of the lasers are described. The
measurement setup used in this experiment is depicted in Fig. 3.9. Both laser
sections are DC biased, with the possibility of superimposing an RF signal to one
of them. The output is fed to a Keopsys CEFA-C-HG C-band erbium-doped fiber-
amplifier (EDFA) which raises the average optical power to 0 dBm. Later, the
optical signal is converted to an electrical signal using a Discovery photodetector.
The electrical signal is finally fed to an Agilent N9010A EXA electrical spectrum
analyzer (ESA).




Figure 3.9: Block diagram of the setup used in the self-pulsation characterization.

   First, we investigate the characteristics of the unlocked self-pulsation, i.e.
without an applied (superimposed) RF signal. We start by showing the possibility
of obtaining self-pulsation operation at different frequencies. In the next section,
the locking of the self-pulsation signal is attempted, by introducing a locking RF
signal.
   As shown in Fig. 3.10, Laser A exhibits self-pulsation behavior with
frequencies of 12.5, 25 and 40 GHz, with a spectral width of 40 MHz (measured
by the ESA), and a signal-to-noise ratio of 15 dB. It is possible to continuously
tune the repetition frequency by tuning the injected current in each section, or by
tuning the temperature of the stage. The low electrical power level in Fig. 3.10
can be explained by the fact that it is equal to the optical power squared (e.g. −40
dBm electrical power translates to −15 dBm optical power, assuming
photodetector responsivity of 0.7 A/W). Moreover, the 8 dB grating coupler losses
are included in the power measurement.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                           61


  We investigate these dependencies for both lasers. Fig. 3.11 (a) shows the
measured repetition frequency when varying the current in the right section while
keeping the current in the left section at 43 mA in Laser A. The spectra recorded
by the ESA are shown in Fig. 3.11 (a’), in which the self-pulsation peaks move to
higher frequencies with higher injected current I R. The repetition frequency can
be tuned over a range of 25 GHz by tuning the current. The opposite trend is
shown in Fig. 3.11 (b) when increasing the current in the left section. Fig. 3.11
(b’) shows the spectra for this case. By increasing the current, the separation
between the two laser lines (in Fig. 3.8 (b, d)) is reduced (increased) in Fig. 3.11
(b) (Fig. 3.11 (a)), which reduces (increases) the beating frequency.




Figure 3.10: RF spectra of the self-pulsations in Laser A at around 12.5, 24.5 and 39 GHz.

   Fig. 3.12 (a, b) shows the current scan for Laser B, in which the repetition
frequency decreases first and increases again as the scan current increases. This
is shown in the spectra in Fig. 3.12 (a’, b’). In this case, tuning the repetition
frequency by changing the current is done over a range of 6 GHz. The tuning
behavior can be explained by beating as follows. At first, the spacing between the
two laser peaks is reduced, until the peaks are almost overlapping, and then the
spacing is increased again. The peaks never overlap completely, and thus a
frequency of zero is never obtained. This can be explained by thinking about the
two laser sections as two coupled oscillators which cannot have the exact same
frequency, as explained in detail in [29].
  This measurement was done while keeping the substrate temperature at 15 °C.
The variation of the repetition frequency with current can also be due to a shift of
the Bragg wavelengths in both sections due to Joule heating. This leads to the next
factor that controls the repetition frequency: the temperature. The temperature of
the sample holder (which is assumed to be close to the substrate temperature) was
used to tune the repetition frequency over a 7 GHz range. The dependence of the
repetition frequency on the sample holder temperature is shown in Fig. 3.13 (a),
in which a repetition frequency tuning from 35 – 42 GHz can be observed for
Laser B. The spectra are also shown in Fig. 3.13 (b). It is noticeable that the
amplitude of the peaks decreases with increasing temperature. This is expected
since heating normally reduces the output power of the laser.
62                                                                         CHAPTER 3




Figure 3.11: Variation of the repetition frequency over 25 GHz by tuning the current in
the right (a, a’) or left (b, b’) laser section for Laser A.




Figure 3.12: Variation of the repetition frequency over 6 GHz by tuning the current in the
right (a, a’) or left (b, b’) laser section for laser B.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                         63




Figure 3.13: (a) Tuning the substrate temperature changes the repetition frequency over
a 7 GHz range (Laser B), (b) the shift in the self-pulsation peak from 35 – 42 GHz.


3.2.5 Locking the self-pulsation to an RF signal
In this section, an RF signal is used to lock the self-pulsation signal. The RF signal
is applied to the right section of Laser A in this measurement, but similar results
can be achieved when the RF signal is applied to the left section. The electrical
spectrum in Fig. 3.14 (a) shows the RF locking signal and the self-pulsation peak.
The spectral linewidth of the self-pulsation peak is 40 MHz (Fig. 3.14 (b)).
Initially (i.e. without locking), the self-pulsation peak is not stable and can
fluctuate over a few 100 MHz due to fluctuations in current and/or temperature.
   The RF signal power decreases further away from the repetition frequency. This
is because away from the repetition frequency, the modulation response has a
weaker or no resonance. An RF signal with an electrical power of −7 dBm and a
phase noise of –83 dBc is generated using a Rohde & Schwarz SMR40 RF signal
generator and applied to the laser using a Cascade GS probe with a 100 μm pitch.
After locking, it is observed that the spectral linewidth of the laser was reduced
significantly from 40 MHz to less than 10 Hz (Fig. 3.14 (c, d)). It is expected that
the locked self-pulsation signal has the same linewidth as the generated RF signal,
as shown in [31].
  For the signal to be locked, it should be within a range of around 300 MHz
around the natural repetition frequency. Increasing the RF power widens the
locking range. The minimum RF power that must be applied to the laser to
generate a stable locked signal with a spectral linewidth below 10 Hz is −17 dBm,
substantially lower than the 2 dBm reported in [13].
  We summarize hereby the benefits of locking the self-pulsation signal to an RF
signal. Firstly, locking stabilizes the self-pulsation signal. Without an RF locking
signal, the repetition frequency continuously fluctuates within a range of around
300 MHz. Secondly, locking reduces the spectral linewidth significantly. In our
case, the spectral linewidth before locking was 40 MHz. After locking, the
spectral linewidth is drastically reduced to less than 10 Hz. Finally, locking can
be done using an RF input electrical signal as weak as −17 dBm, with the
opportunity to transmit this signal over an optical link.
64                                                                        CHAPTER 3




                                            -40   (c)
       (a)                                                             (d)
                            (b)             -50



                                            -60
                                  100 MHz




Figure 3.14: The self-pulsation signal with a spectral width of 40 MHz is shown in (a,
b) along with a locking RF signal of −7 dBm at 40 GHz. A locked self-pulsation signal
is shown in (c) with a spectral width of below 10 Hz in (d).

  As mentioned, the RF input electrical signal in Fig. 3.14 has a power of −7
dBm. However, the ESA shows a signal with a power of −47 dBm. This
discrepancy is due to a few factors. First, the impedance mismatch between the
probe (50 Ω) and the device (≈ 10 Ω), which means a 66% reflection. Second, the
losses throughout the electrical/optical link, such as the grating coupler losses,
losses in the RF cables and RF probe.
  The main advantage that our device has over mode-locked lasers is the
tunability. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, obtaining low frequencies is
challenging with mode-locked lasers, since long cavities are needed. Although not
reported here, obtaining low self-pulsation frequencies of less than 3 GHz is also
possible using some of our devices.
   Similarly to this work, tunability was also demonstrated in other monolithic InP
self-pulsating laser diodes [13]. The tunability range was between 20 and 60 GHz.
In our case, since a high-speed photodiodes with a bandwidth higher than 40 GHz
is expensive and not available, we could not demonstrate self-pulsation
frequencies higher than 40 GHz.

3.3 Bandwidth-enhanced DFB laser diodes
In the previous section, the beating between two laser lines was employed to
generate self-pulsations using two-section laser diodes. It was previously reported
that two-section laser diodes can also be used to enhance the bandwidth of
standard single-section DFB laser diodes [32–34]. Tuning the bias condition, one
can shift the operation from the self-pulsation regime to the bandwidth
enhancement regime, and vice versa.
  In this section, we demonstrate an improvement to our standard single-section
DFB laser diode using this approach. We discuss the theory of operation and
review the relevant literature. Finally, we present the laser characteristics.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                       65


3.3.1 Literature review and state-of-the-art
Classical single section InP-on-Si DFB laser diodes are limited by their relaxation
oscillation frequency. Fortunately, there are some advanced laser designs that
improve the modulation bandwidth substantially. The exploitation of a photon-
photon resonance (PPR) is one of the techniques used to enhance the modulation
bandwidth [32–33, 35]. In this technique, the existence of a second longitudinal
mode (Fig. 3.15 (a)) close to the main laser mode (Fig. 3.15 (b)) enhances the
bandwidth to beyond the beat frequency [36]. For example, the exploitation of a
PPR using an external cavity made by the grating couplers helped to improve the
3 dB modulation bandwidth from 8 to 34 GHz in [35]. The transmission of 56
Gbps NRZ was verified.




Figure 3.15: Photon-photon resonance is exploited by bringing the second longitudinal
mode in (a) close to the main mode, to enhance the bandwidth beyond the beat frequency
in (b) [36].

  In [32], a monolithic InP distributed reflector (DR) laser was fabricated to
exploit the same effect. The structure consisted of a DFB section and a DBR
section. A 3 dB modulation bandwidth of 55 GHz and transmission of 112 Gbps
PAM-4 were shown. A similar modulation enhancement of 57.4 GHz was
predicted for a two-section DFB laser diode in [34].
   To understand the bandwidth enhancement mechanism, and the distinction
from the self-pulsation mechanisms, we discuss the finite-difference traveling-
wave (FDTW) simulations in Fig. 3.16 [33]. In these simulations, two DBR lasers,
and a phase tuning section are considered. Fig. 3.16 (a–c) show the round-trip
gain (on the left axis in blue) and round-trip phase (on the right axis in red) around
the Bragg frequency for phase shift Φs = 0, π, π/2, respectively. Moreover, Fig.
3.16 (a–c) show the main cavity mode (the red circle), the relevant side mode (the
green circle), and other modes (the blue dots). The three scenarios show how
tuning the phase section and changing the frequency (wavelength) and thus the
roundtrip gain of the main and side mode changes the small signal modulation
response (S21), as shown in Fig. 3.17 (a–c).
66                                                                         CHAPTER 3




Figure 3.16: Round-trip gain (left axis in blue) and round-trip phase (right axis in red)
around the Bragg frequency (wavelength), for different phase shifts (a) Φs = 0, (b) Φs =
π, and (c) Φs = π/2. The main cavity mode (the green circle), side mode (the red circle),
and other modes (blue dots) are indicated [33].




Figure 3.17: Small-signal modulation response (S21) for different phase shifts (a) Φs =
0, (b) Φs = π, and (c) Φs = π/2 showing the different responses corresponding to the
different scenarios in Fig. 3.16 [33].
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                      67


   In the first scenario shown in Fig. 3.16 (a), the side mode has a very low gain.
This is the case in which there is no bandwidth enhancement, which corresponds
to the small-signal modulation response shown in Fig. 3.17 (a). In the second
scenario shown in Fig. 3.16 (b), the side mode has as much gain as the main mode.
This produces a self-pulsation signal, which is the result of the distorted S21
response in Fig. 3.17 (b). In the third and last scenario shown in Fig. 3.16 (c), the
side mode has a lower gain than the main mode. This results in an enhancement
in the modulation bandwidth at the frequency equal to the frequency separation
between the main mode and the side mode (38 GHz), as shown in the S21 response
in Fig. 3.17 (c).
   In summary, the regime of operation can shift between the normal laser
modulation regime, the bandwidth enhancement regime, and the self-pulsation
regime, depending on the location of the main and side modes, and their round-
trip gain. The existence of a phase tuning section makes it easier to operate the
device in different regimes.

3.3.2 Design
A two-section DFB laser diode, with the same configuration as Laser A in the
previous section was used in this experiment. The only difference was that the
period of the grating was 241 nm, which slightly redshifts the lasing wavelength
compared to the lasers shown in the previous section.
  As shown in Fig. 3.16 (c), depending on the location of the main and side
modes, the modulation bandwidth can be enhanced. A phase tuning section can
be useful to change the phase of the light in the cavity and thus change the
operation of the device. For simplicity, we propose a design using a two-section
DFB laser, and we scan the injected current through all possible current
combinations. The results shown below are the best obtained results, among many
other lasers. In our experiment, the right section is modulated while the left laser
output is considered. This gave a higher modulation bandwidth than modulating
the left section. We hypothesize that this is because the left section can act as a
reflector (more feedback), and as an amplifier (more power), which enhances the
performance further.

3.3.3 Static laser characteristics
The optical output power in the waveguide versus bias current behavior for the
device is similar to the one reported in section 3.2. Fig. 3.18 (a) shows the optical
spectrum (before filtering) when the bias currents are IL = 48 mA and IR = 60 mA,
which produces the highest 3 dB modulation bandwidth found while performing
a sweep. In Fig. 3.18 (b), the two beating modes with significantly different power
levels (after filtering) with a separation of 20 GHz (≈ 0.15 nm) are observed.
This is different than Laser B shown in Fig. 3.7 (b), which cannot be used for
bandwidth enhancement, since the laser lines are of comparable power, which
would result in strong response around the beating frequency and self-pulsation,
as shown in the previous section and also as shown in Fig. 3.16–17 (b).
68                                                                            CHAPTER 3


   As the bonding layer thickness is very small (less than 10 nm), the silicon
grating coupling is strong. The stop-band of each laser section is not clearly
identified in Fig. 3.18 (a), but from section 3.2, we have seen that the stopbands
are around 5 nm, with the extracted coupling coefficient κ being ≈ 150 cm−1. This
high coupling coefficient, and the high currents in comparison to the ones used in
section 3.2 for self-pulsation, could be the source of the multi-mode behavior
observed in the spectrum. Therefore, a possible solution to eliminate such modes
is to lower the coupling coefficient (i.e. by increasing the bonding thickness)
which in turn reduces the stop-band of each section and excites fewer modes.



        (a)                                             (b)




Figure 3.18: Optical spectrum (power in the waveguide) of the laser at IL = 48 mA, IR =
60 mA (a) before filtering and (b) after filtering at the receiver side. The spacing between
the main mode and the side mode is about 0.15 nm, which corresponds to 20 GHz.

   Moreover, a quarter-wave (λ/4) phase shift is placed in the middle of the cavity
to ensure single-mode operation for DFB laser diodes [37–39]. Our device has
indeed a λ/4 phase shift in the middle. However, since the middle of the cavity
lies between the two laser sections, and since each section can be considered as
an independent laser source, placing multiple phase shifts as proposed in [40–41]
along the laser cavity could be a more suitable solution to guarantee single-mode
operation.

3.3.4 Dynamic laser characteristics
A small-signal modulation experiment is done by constructing the setup depicted
in Fig. 3.19. An Agilent N5247A vector network analyzer (VNA) was used to
provide electrical signals up to 67 GHz. The signal is superimposed on a positive
bias, using a 45 GHz bias Tee, and the signal is applied to the right laser section
using a Cascade GS probe with a 100 μm pitch. A Keopsys CEFA-C-HG C-band
EDFA was used to boost the optical output signal and compensate for any losses
in the optical link. For example, the loss from the grating coupler is about 8 dB
around 1550 nm. The amplifier is followed by a Santec optical tunable filter
(OTF-350) with a bandwidth of 1 nm to suppress the amplified spontaneous
emission from the EDFA.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                      69




Figure 3.19: Block diagram of the small-signal modulation experiment setup

   For our experiment, the laser line at 1555 nm (Fig. 3.18 (a)) is filtered out with
a tunable filter that has a bandwidth of 5 nm (Fig. 3.18 (b)). Moreover, the filter
also serves to eliminate the other modes, which improves the quality of the eye
diagram at the receiver side. An alternative could be to integrate an on-chip optical
filter. Making this device single-mode (as discussed, by reducing the coupling
coefficient or using multiple phase shifts) and having high output power (e.g. less
grating coupler losses) removes the necessity for the amplifier and the filter.
A 3 dB modulation bandwidth of 10 GHz can be observed in Fig. 3.20 (a) at IL =
46 mA, and IR = 50 mA. This relaxation oscillation frequency is comparable to
the one in the previously demonstrated devices [28, 35]. By tuning IR to 60 mA,
a second resonance appears around 20 GHz. This improves the total 3 dB
modulation bandwidth to 23 GHz, more than a factor of 2. The resonance peak at
20 GHz results from the beating between the two laser lines, with the side mode
sufficiently weaker than the main mode, as shown in Fig. 3.18 (b). These lines are
separated by around 20 GHz (≈ 0.15 nm). There is an agreement between the
beating modes and the S21 response in our case (Fig. 3.18 (b), Fig. 3.20 (b)) and
in [33] (Fig. 3.16–17 (c)).




Figure 3.20: S21 response showing a 3 dB modulation bandwidth of (a) 10 GHz and (b)
23 GHz for the indicated bias current combinations.
70                                                                        CHAPTER 3


   As shown in section 3.2, it is possible to tune the separation between the laser
lines, which controls the frequency at which the second resonance occurs, and
fine-tunes the S21 response. However, for the second resonance to enhance the
bandwidth, the gap between it and the relaxation oscillation frequency should be
minimal, such that the drop in the response in between would still be within 3 dB.
Therefore, the enhancement is still partially limited by the relaxation oscillation
frequency.
   As mentioned in [33], there are different regimes in which the laser can operate.
If the laser is operating in the self-pulsation regime, it won’t be possible to use it
for bandwidth enhancement, and vice versa. This is confirmed in our experiment,
as there was no self-pulsation behavior found while the laser was operating in the
bandwidth enhancement regime shown in Fig. 3.20 (b). Here, we want to show
that by tuning the injected current values around the neighborhood of the
bandwidth-enhancement regime, it is possible to shift the operation regime to the
self-pulsation regime. To do that, the injected current combination I R and IL to
obtain 3.19 (b) was changed from (46 mA, 60 mA) to (34 mA, 48 mA) to obtain
the self-pulsation behavior in Fig. 3.21. The repetition rate in Fig. 3.21 is around
20 GHz, identical to the 20 GHz bandwidth enhancement peak in Fig. 3.20 (b).




Figure 3.21: Electrical output power in the self-pulsation regime at IL = 34 mA and IR =
48 mA showing a self-pulsation signal at 20 GHz

   Data transmission experiments were conducted to investigate the large-signal
modulation of the laser, after constructing the setup depicted in Fig. 3.22. This
was done using a Keysight M8195A arbitrary waveform generator (AWG), a
Discovery photodetector, and a Keysight DSAZ634A real-time oscilloscope.
Transmission of 45 Gbps (NRZ-OOK) using a pseudorandom binary sequence
(PRBS) data with a pattern length of 27−1 shows an open eye diagram, in Fig.
3.23. The voltage swing applied to the right section of the laser is about 2.2 V pp.
The bias conditions were: IL = 46 mA and IR = 50 mA, resulting in −5 dBm output
power in single mode fiber.
   We observe a discrepancy between the IR used to obtain the best S21 response
(23 GHz at IR = 60 mA), and the one used to obtain the highest bitrate in the
large-signal modulation experiment (45 Gbps at IR = 50 mA). The S21 response
for both cases was shown in Fig. 3.20 (a, b). This can be justified by the fact that
the two experiments were done over different time periods, under different
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                         71


conditions and with different setups. For example, temperature variations due to
the use of different temperature controllers could influence the results.




Figure 3.22: Block diagram of the large-signal modulation setup




                  (a)                                        (b)
Figure 3.23: Eye diagrams for 45 Gbps NRZ sub-HD-FEC transmission (a) back-to-back
and (b) with 2 km NZ-DSF, for a pattern length of 27−1.

  A root-raised-cosine filter with a roll-off factor α = 0.5 is used to shape the
eye diagrams. Fig. 3.23 shows the eye diagram for a back-to-back configuration,
followed by the eye diagram after transmission over a 2 km long non-zero
dispersion-shifted fiber (NZ-DSF). The used Corning fiber had a dispersion D
of 5 ps/nm⋅km.
  If we assume no chirp, a maximum bitrate 𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥 of 70 Gbps can be achieved,
as given by (3.3) [42] solely based on the fiber dispersion characteristics.
Normally, direct modulation induces chirp to the signal, which would reduce the
achieved bit rate in comparison to the theoretical one. In (3.3), L is the length (2
km) and β2 is called the group velocity dispersion parameter (−6.4 ps2/km),
which tells how much an optical pulse broadens due to the propagation inside an
optical fiber, as given by (3.4).
                                          1
                              𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥 ≤                                          (3.3)
                                      4 √|𝛽2 |𝐿

                                       2𝜋𝑐
                              𝐷=−          𝛽                                 (3.4)
                                        𝜆2 2
72                                                                    CHAPTER 3


  The bit error rate (BER) versus received power measurement for this laser is
shown in Fig. 3.24. 45 Gbps transmission for word lengths of 27−1 and 215 with
a BER lower than the 7% hard-decision forward error correction (HD-FEC) limit
of 3.8 ⋅ 10−3 is possible for a received signal power above −7 dBm.
  To further improve the modulation bandwidth, one main improvement would
be to increase the relaxation oscillation frequency. This can be done by
increasing the differential gain, reducing the threshold current, or reducing the
laser cavity volume, as will be discussed in the next section.




Figure 3.24: bit error rate (BER) versus received power showing sub-HD-FEC operation
for a received power as low as −5 dBm.

3.4 Low-threshold DFB laser diodes
To ensure stable performance for the devices in data centers, the temperature
needs to be stabilized. Therefore, cooling needs to be applied at all times. The
operating costs are very significant, and reports show that more than half of the
data centres’ cooling systems are inefficient [43]. To improve this, the power
efficiency of the single components needs to be improved. The less heat generated
by these devices, the less energy needs to be spent on cooling. If achieved, this
can massively reduce operational costs.
   This section focuses on the design and the fabrication of low-threshold DFB
laser diodes. First, we review the state of the art, and the different device
configurations used to achieve this goal. Next, we discuss the design and
fabrication of the proposed laser structure. Then, we report on the static
characteristics and compare the threshold current values to the case of a standard
single-section DFB laser. We also compare the current values needed to reach
certain output power in both cases. Finally, we show the dynamic characteristics,
starting from small-signal modulation and ending with large-signal modulation
experiments.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                       73


3.4.1 Literature review and state-of-the-art
There were many attempts in the literature to improve the efficiency of laser
diodes. The approach used in several works used a reflector on one side of the
cavity. For simplicity, let us consider a Fabry-Perot cavity with length L,
confinement factor Γ, threshold gain gth, facet reflectivities 𝑅1 and 𝑅2 , and 𝑎0 is
the cavity losses. The lasing condition is given by:

                            𝑅1 𝑅2 𝑒 (𝛤𝑔𝑡ℎ −𝑎0 )2𝐿 = 1                          (3.5)

   (3.5) shows that if 𝑅1 or 𝑅2 increased, the threshold gain would decrease. The
threshold gain is the gain for which all losses are compensated. In this case, the
number of photons lost in one roundtrip is equal to the number of photons
generated. At that point, the lasing action starts. There are two sources of loss:
mirror loss, and internal loss.
   Reflecting light back into the cavity reduces the lost photons, which reduces the
threshold gain. In a laser diode, this means less current needs to be injected to
achieve lasing. Moreover, increasing the reflectivity on one side can also decrease
the required cavity length L. Decreasing the cavity length is not only interesting
because of the smaller footprint, but also to increase the modulation bandwidth.
The modulation bandwidth in a laser diode is given by:

                                       𝑑𝐺 (𝐼 − 𝐼𝑡ℎ )                           (3.6)
                          (2𝜋𝑓𝑟 )2 =
                                       𝑑𝑁 𝑞𝑑𝑤𝐿

where 𝑓𝑟 is the relaxation oscillation frequency, 𝑑𝐺/𝑑𝑁 is the differential gain, 𝐼
and 𝐼𝑡ℎ are the injected and threshold current, respectively, 𝑞 is the elementary
charge, 𝑑, 𝑤, and 𝐿 are the thickness, width, and length of the active region. The
gain G is given by (3.7), where 𝛤 is the optical confinement factor, 𝑔 is the
material gain, and 𝑣𝑔 is the group velocity.

                                  𝐺 = 𝛤 𝑔 𝑣𝑔                                   (3.7)

  Reducing the length is not always desired. First, because for a very short cavity,
the reflection or the gain should be very high to satisfy (3.5). Second, reducing
the cavity length in a laser diode increases the electrical resistance and the thermal
resistance. The electrical resistance depends mainly on the dimensions of the
device and the doping. For example, the electrical resistance increases when the
length or width of the cavity decrease, when the thickness increases, or when the
doping decreases. The thermal resistance 𝑅𝑡ℎ also depends on the device
dimensions, and is given by:

                                  ∆𝑇    ∆𝑇   ∆𝑇
                         𝑅𝑡ℎ =        =    =                                   (3.8)
                                 𝑃𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑠 𝑉𝐼 𝑉𝐽𝑤𝐿
74                                                                    CHAPTER 3


where ∆𝑇 is the change in temperature in the active region with respect to the
stage temperature, with and without forward bias, and 𝑃𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑠 is the dissipated
electrical power. We know that 𝑃𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑠 = 𝐼𝑉 , where 𝐼 is the injected electrical
current (given by 𝐼 = 𝐽𝑤𝐿), and 𝑉 is the voltage. In the context of a two-section
laser, the thermal resistance does not increase very much if only one section was
biased, as the second section would act as a heat sink.
   To sum up, the aim is to create a reflection section, such that the gain and
threshold current are decreased, and less electrical power is needed to have a
certain optical power. This allows a device with a shorter length, which increases
the bandwidth, however, this increases the electrical and thermal resistance.
Keeping low electrical and thermal resistance is essential to maintain high optical
output power.
   There were a few attempts to achieve such an operation using different
approaches. A monolithic InP-based distributed reflector (DR) laser, which
consists of an active DFB laser, and a passive DBR, was used in [44]. This allowed
a threshold current of 15.4 mA, and a single mode operation around 1.55 μm.
Another approach was discussed in [45–46], in which a monolithic InP-based
two-section DFB laser was used. In this case, one section was used as a reflector.
It was shown that in comparison to a standard DFB with anti-reflective (AR)
coated facets at both ends (AR-AR), a distributed reflector on one side could
reduce the threshold current, and produce equally high optical output power levels
at lower injected current values. The reported threshold current was 10 mA,
compared to 15 mA for the AR-AR laser, or 15.4 mA in [44], which is around
34% improvement. Reducing the threshold current can help in reducing the power
consumption of the lasers, by being able to obtain a certain output power but at
lower injected current, as will be discussed throughout the section.
   Reducing the threshold current can also be achieved by making a very short
laser. Recently, a threshold current of 0.39 mA was demonstrated in [47], using a
20 μm long DR (DFB/DBR) laser. A bit rate of 25 Gbps was verified. However,
due to the small footprint, the resistance is as high as 900 Ω. Also, this laser had
a maximum output power in the fiber of 77 μW, roughly two orders of magnitude
less than in [45].
   Regarding III-V-on-silicon lasers, one of the first demonstrations was reported
in [48]. This was a standard single-section DFB laser with a threshold current of
25 mA, 3 dB modulation bandwidth of 2.5 GHz, and a maximum output power of
3.5 mW at bias current of 100 mA. An improvement has been reported in [28], in
which a threshold current of 17 mA, 3 dB modulation bandwidth of 15 GHz, and
a maximum output power of 6.5 mW at bias current of 100 mA has been
demonstrated. Similar work using a distributed Bragg reflector laser was reported
in [49], with a threshold current of 20 mA, 3 dB modulation bandwidth of 7 GHz,
and a maximum output power of 15 mW at bias current of 160 mA. The reported
results are for cooled operation at room temperature.
  In this section, we report on the performance of an integrated III-V-on-Si DFB
laser with a distributed reflector at one end, like the one in [45–46]. We aim to
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                                 75


reduce the threshold current values, and consequently obtain similar output
power, 3 dB modulation bandwidth, and data transmission with smaller injected
current values. This is all attempted in the context of heterogeneously integrated
III-V-on-silicon two-section DFB laser diodes.

3.4.2 Design
The top and 3D view of the proposed two-section laser structure are shown in Fig.
3.25 (a, b). The laser is 500 μm long (excluding the tapers) and is cut in two
sections with unequal length. The lengths of the left and the right section are 340
μm and 140 μm. To maximize the achieved relaxation oscillation frequency 𝑓𝑟 , it
is desired to design a narrow and short laser, as shown in (3.6).
  Therefore, the short (right) laser section of 140 μm is chosen to be pumped and
modulated, in comparison to the 340 μm long laser in [28]. Moreover, the laser is
1.5 μm wide, as opposed to the 3.4 μm wide laser in [28]. However, due to the V-
shaped mesa structure (discussed in chapter 2), the width at the bottom of the p-
InP is around 500 nm compared to 1.5 μm at the top of the p-InGaAs. Therefore,
the fabrication of narrower structures can be challenging.

            (a)




            (b)




Figure 3.25: (a) Top and (b) 3D view of the proposed device. The right section is pumped
and acts as a laser diode, while the left one is not pumped and acts as a distributed reflector.

  The tapers are electrically connected to the laser sections, each of them being
230 μm long. This suggests that the threshold current associated with the active
76                                                                               CHAPTER 3


section is less than the threshold current measured for both the active section and
the taper. To measure the exact threshold current of the active section, the tapers
should be electrically isolated, and only the active section should be pumped.
Finally, the silicon DFB grating has a period of 246 nm, with a duty cycle of 50%.

3.4.3 Static laser characteristics
Grating couplers are used to couple the light out of the chip, with a coupling loss
of 6 dB. Fig. 3.26 shows a comparison between the output optical power in the
waveguide as a function of injected current. This is done for a few cases: (1)
Injected current IR in the right section (while IL=0), and (4) Injected current while
short circuiting both sections and pumping them with a single current I Single (i.e.
identical to a standard single-section DFB laser). In between these two cases, the
effect of slightly tuning IL was also investigated. The results show a shift in Ith for
(2, 3) IL = 2, 4 mA, which indicates that the lowest value of I th was achieved at IL
= 0 mA. However, at higher current, we can see that the output power is slightly
higher, as the left section now has less absorption. In the measurements reported
below, the light is extracted from the side of the biased laser section, since the
other section is a reflector/absorber.
   The measured series resistance is around 10 Ω for each of the laser sections.
The threshold currents for each case are shown in Fig. 3.26: (1) Ith (IL = 0) = 9 mA
and (2) Ith, Single = 17 mA. As shown, Ith, (IL = 0) is less than Ith, Single by 47%. Ith (IL = 0)
is also 47% less than the 17 mA reported in [28].




                                           (1)
                                           (2)
                                           (3)


                                                               (4)




Figure 3.26: Optical output power Popt in the waveguide versus the total current injected
IR + IL for (1, 2, 3) IL = 0, 2, 4 mA, and (4) the total uniform current injected in the complete
laser length by short circuiting both sections ISingle.

  The optical output power in the waveguide (averaged between 30 and 50 mA)
for the first case is higher than the value reported in [28], and 3 times higher than
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                            77


for the second case, as shown in Fig. 3.26. Fig. 3.27 (a, b) show the single mode
behavior of the laser with IR = 15 and 45 mA, with wavelengths of 1544.5 nm and
1540.5 nm. Normally, a higher injected current would redshift the wavelength of
operation. However, the wavelength of operation blueshifts instead. This indicates
that mode hopping occurred, which explains the kink in the optical power around
IR = 20 mA in Fig. 3.26.



       (a)                                           (b)




Figure 3.27: The spectrum of the laser showing mode hopping from (a) 1544.5 nm (at IR
= 15 mA) to (b) 1540.5 nm (at IR = 45 mA), instead of a redshift.

   In addition to the increased power efficiency, the threshold current of these
lasers is a key factor in reducing power consumption. This configuration has
resulted in devices with a very low threshold current of 7 and 6 mA, as shown in
Fig. 3.28 (a, b), for laser sections that are (140 μm, 140 μm) and (100 μm, 100
μm) long. From the three previously reported lasers, it can be concluded that
smaller laser sections have lower threshold current. Moreover, it can be observed
that with a smaller section, the maximum output power is less, and the output
optical power drop is faster (i.e. at a lower current). This is because shorter
sections have higher series and thermal resistance. Finally, the width of the laser
was decreased (1.5 μm as opposed to 3.4 μm in [28]), which also increases the
series and thermal resistance.



     (a)                                             (b)




Figure 3.28: Optical output power Popt in the waveguide as a function of the current in one
of the sections. The length of each section is (a) 140 μm and (b) 100 μm.
78                                                                          CHAPTER 3


  We wanted to see if we can further push down the threshold current in the laser
shown in Fig. 3.28 (b). Since the taper is also pumped, it is predicted that the
actual threshold current for only the right active section is around half of the
measured threshold current value. To investigate that, the taper is electrically
isolated from the laser section by etching the gold using FIB. After etching, the
resistance increased from 10 to 13 Ω. Knowing that the threshold current before
etching was 6 mA, we can expect the threshold current after etching to decrease
to 4.2 mA. This is in agreement with the measurement results shown in Fig. 3.29
(a, b), in which a threshold current of around 4.5 mA is shown. It is also noticed
that the output optical power reduces, since the 230 μm long taper is acting as an
absorber (as it could not be pumped in this specific chip).



        (a)
                                                                 (b)




Figure 3.29: (a) After taper isolation, the threshold current has dropped, along with the
optical power. A closer look in (b) shows that the threshold current was reduced to 4.5 mA.

3.4.4 Dynamic laser characteristics
We investigate the laser shown in Fig. 3.26 further, due to its superior
performance compared to the ones in Fig. 3.28 (a, b). The S21 response was
obtained using an Agilent N5247A VNA, after constructing the setup shown in
Fig. 3.30. The right section is modulated at two different bias currents, while the
current in the left section I L = 0 mA. The measured 3 dB modulation bandwidth
is nearly 15 GHz, as shown in Fig. 3.31. This is obtained at IR = 45 mA, a 55%
lower bias current than used in [28] to obtain about the same bandwidth.
  The drop in the S21 at low frequencies was also observed in previous devices
and is attributed to the extra modulation of the taper at low frequencies. This is
because the taper acts as an amplifier, and is limited by the carrier life time [2]. It
was also shown that the impact on data transmission can be minimized by
electrically isolating the tapers.
  The setup in Fig. 3.32 is constructed for the large-signal modulation
experiment. This was done using a Keysight M8195A AWG. After amplifying
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                             79


the signal using a 50 GHz RF electrical amplifier (SHF-S807), the RF electrical
signal generated by the AWG is applied to the right laser section using a Cascade
Ground-Signal (GS) probe with a 100 μm pitch. To boost the output optical signal,
an EDFA is used. The amplified spontaneous emission is filtered out using an
optical tunable filter (Santec OTF-350). Finally, a photodetector converts the
signal back to an electrical signal, which is fed to a Keysight DSAZ634A real-
time oscilloscope.




Figure 3.30: Block diagram of the small-signal modulation experiment setup




Figure 3.31: The S21 response for two injected currents into the right section IR while IL =
0 mA. The 3 dB modulation bandwidth is 15 GHz for IR = 45 mA.
80                                                                    CHAPTER 3




Figure 3.32: Block diagram of the large-signal modulation setup

  Transmission of a 28 Gbps NRZ-OOK signal using a PRBS with a word length
of 27−1 was verified. The output of the RF amplifier is a voltage swing with 1.13
Vpp, and is then applied to the device, at a bias current I R = 45 mA. Fig. 3.33 (a,
b) shows the eye diagrams for back-to-back configuration and after transmission
over a 2 km long NZ-DSF Corning fiber. The recorded BER with the 2 km long
NZ-DSF is less than 1.0 ⋅ 10−6. With longer word lengths, the device performance
degrades, and the eye diagram closes. This is because longer word lengths contain
more low frequency components. This is in agreement with the S21 response in
Fig. 3.31, which shows a low frequency roll-off. This roll-off makes the device
performance poor for longer word lengths.
  The results suggest a drastic improvement in bandwidth compared to the one
obtained in [28], achieving the same bandwidth with 59% less power
consumption, and obtaining a 47% lower threshold current.




             (a)



             (b)


Figure 3.33: (a, b) Eye diagrams for transmission at 28 Gbps in the back-to-back
configuration and with a 2 km NZ-DSF link for a pattern length of 27−1
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                       81


3.5 Conclusion
We have demonstrated III-V-on-silicon two-section DFB laser diodes, for three
different functions. Hereunder, we conclude for each one.

Self-pulsating DFB laser diodes:

   The first function was self-pulsation. All of the previous demonstrations were
on monolithic III-V DFB lasers. The demonstrations showed pulsating
frequencies as high as 40 GHz [9]. This is the first time a non-mode-locked self-
pulsating laser is demonstrated on the III-V-on-silicon platform. We have shown
that by varying the currents and the temperature, the repetition frequency can be
tuned over a wide range between 12–40 GHz. The tuning of the repetition
frequency gives this laser an advantage over mode-locked lasers. The self-
pulsations can be locked to an RF signal with a minimum power of −17 dBm,
substantially lower than the −2 dBm given in [13]. This results in a narrow RF
spectral linewidth of less than 10 Hz, which is expected to be the same as that of
the RF signal generator [31]. This is useful, for instance, in the generation of an
optical microwave carrier, which is desired for radio-over-fiber applications.

Bandwidth-enhanced DFB laser diodes:

  The second function was using the two-section laser structure for the
enhancement of the modulation bandwidth, compared to that of a standard single-
section laser. This was done by introducing a second resonance peak in the S21
response. This allowed to push the maximum achievable modulation bandwidth
up to 25 GHz. Data transmission at 45 Gbps was shown.
  The performance was enhanced compared to that of a similar standard single-
section laser in [28]. However, the performance fails to surpass the modulation
bandwidth of (1) 34 GHz in [35] caused by PPR due to an external cavity, and (2)
55 GHz in [32], caused by PPR due to the interaction between DFB-DBR modes.
This is summarized in Table 3.2.

Table 3.2: Comparison between the device performance in [32, 35, 50] and in this work
                                   [35]         [32]          [50]          This
                                                                           work
         Platform                III-V/Si     III-V        III-V/SiC      III-V/Si
   Number of sections                1           2             2              2
       Laser type                  DFB      DFB/DBR        DFB/DBR       DFB/DFB
 Small-signal modulation            34          55            >100           25
   bandwidth (GHz)

  In comparison to [35], the power levels drop in between the resonance and the
enhancement frequencies for bandwidths more than 25 GHz, which prevents the
device from outperforming the one in [35].
82                                                                    CHAPTER 3


  Another reason the device could not outperform the ones in [32, 35] is because
of the relaxation oscillation frequency. The relaxation oscillation frequency is 25
GHz in [32], while 8 GHz in this work. As previously mentioned, the relaxation
oscillation frequency is defined by the parameters given in (3.6), which depends
on many factors. For a second resonance peak to enhance the bandwidth, the gap
between the two frequency peaks (the relaxation and the enhancement peaks)
should be minimal, for the response not to drop significantly between them.
Further study is required to improve the relaxation frequency.
  There are a few ways to increase the relaxation oscillation frequency, as
suggested by (3.6). For example, using a material with a higher differential gain,
or by increasing the number of quantum wells. Reducing the threshold current, or
the volume, are alternative ways to increase the relaxation oscillation frequency,
as attempted in section 3.4.
  It is worth mentioning a recent work that reported a high bandwidth of >100
GHz using a distributed reflector (DFB/DBR) [50]. In this work, a Silicon Carbide
(SiC) substrate is used, which has a thermal conductivity of 490 W/m/K, in
comparison to 68 and 149 W/m/K for InP and silicon, respectively. This
significantly improves the performances by eliminating any thermal issues.
Additionally, a high confinement factor was achieved, by forming a thin III-V
layer on a low refractive index material.
Low-threshold DFB laser diodes:
   Thirdly, and finally, two-section lasers were used to reduce the power
consumption compared to the equivalent standard single-section lasers. Table 3.3
summarizes the research findings, and compares them to similar monolithic InP
devices in the literature. Table 3.4 has the same comparison, but to III-V-on-
silicon devices.
   In our devices, we concluded that the threshold current can be reduced when
reducing the laser section length. Threshold currents of 9, 7, and 6 mA were
demonstrated for lasers with length 250, 150 and 100 μm, respectively. It was also
observed that the power levels dropped for shorter device lengths, which indicated
that the heating of the device becomes more dominant. By isolating the tapers
from the laser section, the threshold current was reduced from 6 to 4.5 mA. Since
the taper is not pumped, it starts to absorb the light, instead of acting as a
semiconductor optical amplifier. This results in a further reduction in optical
output power.
   In comparison to monolithic InP devices, the threshold current value reported
in this work is slightly better than the one reported in [45] (9 versus 10 mA). Both
of them have around 30% smaller threshold current than the one reported in [44].
However, the power consumption remains lower in [45]. This can be justified by
examining Fig. 3.26, in which the optical output power goes down drastically after
I = 40 mA. As previously discussed, heating is one of the problems that our III-
V-on-silicon lasers suffer from. This is mainly due to the 2 μm thick buried oxide,
the 100 nm bonding layer consisting of both BCB and oxide, and finally, it could
be partially attributed to the planarizing side BCB, as shown in Fig. 3.34.
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                          83


Table 3.3: Comparison between this work and the monolithic InP devices in the literature
                                                                                This
                                  [44]           [45]            [47]
                                                                               work
         Platform                 III-V          III-V         III-V/Si       III-V/Si
                                                                               DFB/
        Laser type             DFB/DBR        DFB/DFB        DFB/DBR
                                                                                DFB
    Number of sections             2               2              2               2
          Ith (mA)                15.4            10             0.39             9
    Maximum output
   power (mW) @ bias             4 @ 45        17 @ 50       0.08 @ 1.8      3.5 @ 45
      current (mA)
       Small-signal
       modulation                   -             23               -             15
    bandwidth (GHz)
        I (mA) for
                                    -             20               -             45
    Maximum BW3 dB
   Power consumption
   (mW) for maximum                 -             28               -             83
           BW3 dB
     Efficiency % for
     maximum output                 -            34%            2.7%           4.3%
           power

Table 3.4: Comparison between this work and the III-V/silicon devices in the literature
                                                                                This
                                    [48]           [49]          [28]
                                                                               work
          Platform                III-V/Si      III-V/Si       III-V/Si       III-V/Si
                                                                               DFB/
         Laser type                DFB            DBR            DFB
                                                                                DFB
    Number of sections                1             1              1              2
          Ith (mA)                   25            20             17              9
    Maximum output
   power (mW) @ bias            3.5 @ 100      15 @ 160       6.5 @ 100      3.5 @ 45
      current (mA)
       Small-signal
  modulation bandwidth              2.5             7             15             15
           (GHz)
        I (mA) for
                                    105            131            100            45
    maximum BW3 dB
   Power consumption
   (mW) for maximum                 210            235            200            83
           BW3 dB
     Efficiency % for
     maximum output                1.6%           2.4%           3.4%          4.3%
           power
84                                                                         CHAPTER 3


   The thermal conductivities of BCB and silicon oxide are 0.29 and 1.38 W/m⋅K
at room temperature, respectively. On the other hand, the thermal conductivities
of the silicon and InP substrates are 149 and 68 W/m⋅K at room temperature,
respectively. The poor thermal conductivity of BCB and oxide prevents good heat
sinking into the silicon substrate. InP-based lasers, such as the one in [45] can
easily sink the heat through the InP substrate. Moreover, since the device
dimensions were shrunk compared to [28], the heating effect was more
pronounced at high currents.
   If the heating effect is not dominant, shrinking the device further can reduce the
power consumption and threshold current. This is shown in [47], in which a record
low threshold current of 0.39 mA was reported using a DR (DFB/DBR) InP laser
fabricated on a silicon substrate. This was due to a few reasons. First, this device
had a much larger coupling coefficient κ ≈ 1000 cm−1 compared to κ ≈ 150 cm−1
in our devices. This resulted in the optical output power to be limited to 77 μW.
Second, the heat can sink into the InP but also to the underlying silicon substrate.
  In comparison to III-V-on-silicon devices, the results suggests a drastic
improvement in the performance of the laser diode compared to the very similar
device in [28], which already outperforms [48–49]. Achieving the same
bandwidth with 59% less power consumption was demonstrated, with a 47%
lower threshold current.




Figure 3.34: Cross section of the laser structure showing possible heat sink challenges
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                           85


References
[1] G. Roelkens, A. Abbasi, P. Cardile, U.D. Dave, A. De Groote, Y. De Koninck, S.
Dhoore, X. Fu, A. Gassenq, N. Hattasan, Q. Huang, S. Kumari, S. Keyvaninia, B. Kuyken,
L. Li, P. Mechet, M. Muneeb, D. Sanchez, H. Shao, T. Spuesens, A. Subramanian, S. Uvin,
M. Tassaert, K. Van Gasse, J. Verbist, R. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Van Campenhout,
Y. Xin, J. Bauwelinck, G. Morthier, R. Baets, D. Van Thourhout, “III-V-on-silicon
photonic devices for optical communication and sensing,” Photonics (invited), 2(3), pp.
969–1004, (2015).

[2] A. Abbasi, “High speed directly modulated III-V-on-Silicon DFB lasers,” Doctoral
Thesis, Ghent University, (2016).

[3] S. Dhoore, “Heterogeneously Integrated III-V-on-Silicon Wavelength-Tunable DFB
and DBR Lasers,” Doctoral Thesis, Ghent University, (2018).

[4] X. Qi and J. Liu, “Photonic Microwave Applications of the Dynamics of Semiconductor
Lasers,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 17(2), pp. 1198–1211,
(2011).

[5] J. Capmany, I. Gasulla, and D. Perez, “Microwave photonics: The programmable
processor,” Nature Photonics, 10(1), pp. 6–8, (2016).

[6] P. Barsnley, H.-J. Wickes, G. E. Wickens, and D. M. Spirit, “All-Optical Clock
Recovery from 5 Gb/s RZ Data Using a Self-Pulsating 1.56 μm Laser Diode,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, 3(10), pp. 942–945, (1991).

[7] B. Sartorius, C. Bornholdt, O. Brox, H. J. Ehrke, D. Hoffmann, R. Ludwig, and M.
Möhrle, “All optical clock recovery module based on a self-pulsating DFB-laser,”
Electronic Letters, 34(17), pp. 1664–1665, (1998).

[8] B. Sartorius, C. Bornholdt, O. Brox, H. J. Ehrke, D. Hoffmann, R. Ludwig, and M.
Möhrle, “Bit-Rate Flexible All-Optical Clock Recovery,” Optical Fiber Communication
(OFC), , pp. 24–26 (FB1-1), (1999).

[9] C. Bornholdt, B. Sartorius, S. Schelbase, M. Mohrle, and S. Bauer, “Self-pulsating DFB
laser for all-optical clock recovery at 40Gbit/s,” Electronic Letters, 36(4), pp. 327–328
(2000).

[10] H.-J. Wünsche, U. Bandelow, H. Wenzel, and D. Marcenac, “Self pulsations by mode
degeneracy in two-section DFB lasers,” SPIE Proceedings Series, vol. 2399, pp. 195–206,
(1995).

[11] S. Latkowski, V. Moskalenko, S. Tahvili, L. Augustin, M. Smit, K. Williams, and E.
Bente, “Monolithically integrated 2.5 GHz extended cavity mode-locked ring laser with
intracavity phase modulators,” Optics Letters, 40(1), pp. 77–80, (2015).

[12] Z. Wang, K. Van Gasse,V. Moskalenko, S. Latkowski, E. Bente, B. Kuyken, and G.
Roelkens, “A III-V-on-Si ultra-dense comb laser,” Light Science and Applications, 6(5),
(2017).
86                                                                          CHAPTER 3


[13] W. Wei, P. Lin, S. Ke, and X. Zeng, “Realizing 60 GHz narrow-linewidth photonic
microwaves with very low RF driving power,” Laser Physics Letters, 13(12), p. 126202,
(2016).

[14] R. Schatz, “Longitudinal Spatial Instability in Symmetric Semiconductor Lasers due
to Spatial Hole Burning,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 28(6), pp. 1443–1449,
(1992).

[15] M. Mohrle, U. Feiste, J. Horer, R. Molt, and B. Sartorius, “Gigahertz self-pulsation in
1.5 μm wavelength multisection DFB lasers,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 4(9),
pp. 976–979, (1992).

[16] B. Sartorius, M. Mohrle, S. Malchow, S. Reichenbacher et al., “Wavelength and
polarisation independent all optical synchronisation of high frequency DFB type self-
pulsations,” Electronic Letters, 32(11), pp. 1026–1028, (1996).

[17] B. Sartorius, M. Mohrle, S. Reichenbacher, H. Preier, H.-J. Wunsche, and U.
Bandelow, “Dispersive self Q-switching in self-pulsating DFB lasers,” IEEE Journal of
Quantum Electronics, 33(2), pp. 211–218, (1997).

[18] H. Wenzel, U. Bandelow, H.-J. Wunsche, and J. Rehberg, “Mechanisms of fast self
pulsations in two-section DFB lasers,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 32(1), pp.
69–78, (1996).

[19] D. D. Marcenac, and J. E. Carroll, “Distinction between multimoded and singlemoded
self-pulsations in DFB lasers,” Electronics Letters, 30(14), pp. 1137–1138, (1994).

[20] P. Phelan, D. McDonald, A. Egan, J. Hegarty, R. O’Dowd, G. Farrell, and S. Lindgren,
“Comparison of self-pulsation in multisection lasers with distributed feedback and
intracavity saturable absorbers,” Proceedings of the IEEE, (141), pp. 114–118, (1994).

[21] A.-J. Lowery and P. C. R. Gurney, “Improving pulses from 2-contact self-pulsating
DFB semiconductor lasers,” Semiconductor Laser Conference, paper P-11, pp. 103–104,
(1994).

[22] A.J. Lowery, “Dynamics of SHB-induced mode instabilities in uniform DFB
semiconductor lasers,” Electronics Letters, 29(21), pp. 1852–1854, (1993).

[23] M. Mohrle, B. Sartorius, C. Bornholdt, S. Bauer, O. Brox, A. Sigmund, R. Steingruber,
H. Radziunas, H.-J. Wunsche,, “Detuned Grating Multisection-RW-DFB Lasers for High-
Speed Optical Signal Processing,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, 7(2), pp. 217–223, (2001).

[24] U. Bandelow, H.-J. Wunsche, B. Sartorius, and M. Mohrle, “Dispersive Self- Q-
Switching in DFB Lasers—Theory Versus Experiment,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Quantum Electronics, 3(2), (1997).

[25] B. Sartorius, C. Bornholdt, O. Brox, H.-J. Ehrke, D. Hoffmann, R. Ludwig, and M.
Mohrle, “All-optical clock recovery module based on self-pulsating DFB laser,”
Electronics Letters, 34(17), pp. 1664–1665, (1998).
TWO-SECTION DFB LASER DIODES                                                         87


[26] D. Chen, H. Zhu, S. Liang, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, “Self-pulsation in a two-section DFB
laser with varied ridge width,” Semiconductor Science and Technology, 23(1), pp. 015008,
(2008).

[27] A. Abbasi, C. Spatharakis, G. Kanakis, N. Sequeira Andre, H. Louchet, A. Katumba,
J. Verbist, H. Avramopoulos, P. Bienstman, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, G.
Morthier, “High speed direct modulation of a heterogeneously integrated InP/SOI DFB
laser,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 34(8), pp. 1683–1687, (2016).

[28] A. Abbasi, J. Verbist, J. Van kerrebrouck, F. Lelarge, G. H. Duan, x. Yin, J.
Bauwelinck, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “28 Gb/s direct modulation heterogeneously
integrated C-band InP/SOI DFB laser,” Optics Express, 23(20), pp. 26479–26485, (2015).

[29] G. Dolfo et al., “Damping of coupled harmonic oscillators,” European journal of
physics 39, 025005, (2018).

[30] Rohde & Schwarz SMR40 datasheet

[31] G.-H. Duan, and G. Pham “Injection-locking properties of self pulsation in
semiconductor lasers,” IEE Proceedings – Optoelectronics, 144(4), pp. 228–234, (1997).

[32] Y. Matsui, R. Schatz, T. Pham, W. A. Ling, G. Carey, H. M. Daghighian, D. Adams,
T. Sudo, and C. Roxlo, “55 GHz Bandwidth Distributed Reflector Laser,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 35(3), pp. 397–403, (2017).

[33] P. Bardella, W. W. Chow, and I. Montrosset, “Design and Analysis of Enhanced
Modulation Response in Integrated Coupled Cavities DBR Lasers Using Photon-Photon
Resonance,” Photonics, 3(1), (2016).

[34] T. Numai, “High Resonance Frequency in a Coupled Cavity DFB-LD with Phase-
Shifted/Uniform Gratings by Photon-Photon Resonance,” proceedings in International
Conference of Numerical Simulation of Optoelectronic Devices (NUSOD), pp. 35–36,
(2017).

[35] A. Abbasi, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G.-H. Duan, G.
Roelkens, G. Morthier, “Direct and electro-absorption modulation of a III-V-on-silicon
DFB laser at 56 Gbps,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 23(6), p.
1501307, (2017).

[36] T. Kitano, M. N. Uddin, B. Hong, A. Tajima, H. Jiang, K. Hamamoto, “Demonstration
of photon–photon resonance peak enhancement by waveguide configuration modification
on active multimode interferometer laser diode,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, p.
55(8S3), (2016).

[37] K. Utaka, S. Akiba, K. Sakai, Y. Matsushima, “Analysis of quarter-wave-shifted DFB
laser,” Electronics Letters, 20(8), pp. 326–327, (1984).

[38] J.E.A. Whiteaway, G.H.B. Thompson, A.J. Collar, C.J. Armistead, “The design
assessment of lambda /4 phase-shifted DFB laser structures,” IEEE Journal of Quantum
Electronics, 25(6), pp. 1261–1279, (1989).
88                                                                          CHAPTER 3


[39] M. Okai, S. Tsuji, N. Chinone, “Stability of the longitudinal mode in lambda /4-shifted
InGaAsP/InP DFB lasers,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 25(6), pp. 1314–1319,
(1989).

[40] G. P. Agrawal, J. E. Geusic, and P. J. Anthony, “Distributed feedback lasers with
multiple phase-shift regions,” Applied Physics Letters, 53(3), pp. 178–179 (1988).

[41] Y. Shi, X. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Li, L. Li, and Y. Feng, “Experimental demonstration of
the three phase shifted DFB semiconductor laser based on Reconstruction-Equivalent-
Chirp technique,” Optics Express, 20(16), pp. 17374–17379, (2012).

[42] G. Agrawal, “Fiber-optic communication systems” Third edition, Wiley-Interscience,
(2002).

[43] J. Ni, X. Bai, “A review of air conditioning energy performance in data centers,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 67, pp. 625–640, (2017).

[44] K. Ohira, T. Murayama, H. Yagi, S. Tamura, and S. Arai, “Distributed Reflector Laser
Integrated with Active and Passive Grating Sections Using Lateral Quantum Confinement
Effect,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 42(2), p. 8A, (2003).

[45] G. Liu, G. Zhao, J. Sun, D. Gao, Q. Lu, and W. Guo, “Experimental demonstration of
DFB lasers with active distributed reflector,” Optics Express, 26(23), pp. 29784–29795,
(2018).

[46] G. Zhao, J. Sun, Y. Xi, D. Gao, Q. Lu, and W. Guo, “Design and simulation of two-
section DFB lasers with short active-section lengths,” Optics Express, 24(10), pp. 10590–
10598, (2016).

[47] E. Kanno, K. Takeda, T. Fujii, K. Hasebe, H. Nishi, T. Yamamoto, and Shinji Matsuo,
“Twin-mirror membrane distributed-reflector lasers using 20-μm-long active region on Si
substrates,” Optics Express, 26(2), pp. 1268–1277, (2018).

[48] A. W. Fang, M. N. Sysak, B. R. Koch, R. Jones, E. Lively, Y.-H. Kuo, D. Liang, O.
Raday, and John E. Bowers “Single-Wavelength Silicon Evanescent Lasers,” IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 15(3), pp. 535–544, (2009).

[49] G.-H. Duan, C. Jany, A. Le Liepvre, A. Accard, M. Lamponi, D. Make, P. Kaspar, G.
Levaufre, N. Girard, F. Lelarge, J.-M. Fedeli, A. Descos, B. Ben Bakir, S. Messaoudene,
D. Bordel, S. Menezo, G. de Valicourt, S. Keyvaninia, G. Roelkens, D. Van Thourhout, D.
J. Thomson, F. Y. Gardes, and G. T. Reed, “Hybrid III–V on Silicon Lasers for Photonic
Integrated Circuits on Silicon,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics,
20(4), p. 6100213, (2014).

[50] S. Yamaoka, N.-P. Diamantopoulos, H. Nishi, R. Nakao, T. Fujii, K. Takeda, T.
Hiraki, S. Kanazawa, H. Tanobe, T. Kakitsuka, T. Tsuchizawa, F. Koyama, and S. Matsuo,
“239.3-Gbit/s Net rate PAM-4 transmission using directly modulated membrane lasers on
high-thermal-conductivity SiC,” ECOC post deadline paper, (2019).
              4 Electro-absorption
                                                                  4
        modulated DFB laser diodes
In this chapter, we discuss electro-absorption modulation of a heterogeneously
integrated III-V-on-Si DFB laser diode to achieve transmission of an 80 Gbps
NRZ-OOK signal. The design, static characteristics, small and large signal
modulation experiments of the proposed device are reported.

Contents
       4.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 89
       4.2 Literature review and state-of-the-art ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 90
       4.3 Design ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 93
       4.4 Characterization ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 96
       4.5 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 103
       References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 104


4.1      Introduction
   As data traffic in data centers has reached astronomical proportions, there is
undoubtedly a need for efficient and high bandwidth systems [1]. Increasing data
rates up to 100 or even 400 Gbps per wavelength are expected in the near future
[2]. To achieve that speed, a lot of work has been done on directly and externally
modulated laser diodes, on different platforms. In this chapter, we focus on one
type of external modulation: electro-absorption modulation (EAM). There have
been many demonstrations on different material platforms to achieve high-speed
EAMs, as will be outlined throughout the chapter.




                                       89
90                                                                    CHAPTER 4


  In this work, the design and experimental verification of high-speed electro-
absorption modulation of a III-V-on-silicon DFB laser diode is shown. This type
of laser is sometimes referred to as externally-modulated laser (EML). This
modulation technique is only limited by the RC-constant of the modulator,
compared to a few factors that limit direct modulation, as previously discussed.
  The device under study consists of a standard single-section DFB laser diode,
followed by an adiabatic taper [3], which is used as an electro-absorption
modulator [4]. These tapers are separated from the main laser section in the same
way that the two laser sections were electrically isolated in chapter 3.
  In this work, we try to improve the performance of the device reported in [4],
by optimizing the structure. This chapter is organized as follows. First, we review
the literature, and discuss the state of the art. Next, we discuss the EML structure
design. Then, we present the static measurement results of the EML. After that,
we show the small signal and large signal modulation results. As mentioned in
chapter 2, the device presented in this chapter is based on an InAlGaAs/InP
epitaxial layer structure. The SOI was fabricated using e-beam lithography in the
cleanroom facilities at Ghent University.

4.2      Literature review and state-of-the-art
  There has been much work on high-speed EAMs on different material
platforms. For example, a 100 Gbps NRZ GeSi lumped electro-absorption
modulator implemented on a silicon photonic platform was shown in [5–6]. The
EAM operated at 1600 nm, since it is challenging to have operation at C and O
bands, due to bandgap wavelength of Germanium. Also, Germanium is an indirect
bandgap material, so it doesn’t serve well as an efficient light source.
  InP is a good alternative, since it is a direct bandgap material, with many
demonstrations at C and O bands. For example, C-band InP-based double-side
lumped EML DFB laser shown in 4.1 (a) was demonstrated in [7]. This was used
for 2 × 56 Gbps NRZ signal transmission, as illustrated in Fig. 4.1 (b).
  With regards to the III-V-on-silicon platform, some EAMs have been reported
for O and C bands [8–9]. These were used to successfully demonstrate 50 Gbps
operation on both of them [10]. Fig. 4.2 shows a 100 µm long travelling-wave
EAM. The MQW material used in [8–9] is InAlGaAs, which is also the material
of choice in this work. As previously mentioned, the reason why this material is
superior to InGaAsP is due to the higher conduction band offset. Using
InAlGaAs, other demonstrations showing transmission of 56 Gbps NRZ-OOK
and 100 Gbps duobinary signals using a lumped EAM were reported in [4, 11].
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                    91




        (a)




        (b)




Figure 4.1: (a) Cross section showing a monolithic InP DFB laser with one electro-
absorption modulator on each end. (b) Eye diagrams at 56 Gbps NRZ signal [7].




Figure 4.2: 3D view of the hybrid III-V-on-silicon travelling-wave EAM [9].

   We have spoken about two different types of EAMs: lumped and travelling-
wave (TW) EAMs. The difference lies in the electrode configuration. In a TW
modulator, the RF electrical signal travels through a long electrode of a few
millimeters (transmission line), in the same direction as the optical signal. The
impedance of the modulator should be matched to the impedance of the
transmission line (50 Ω) such that there would be maximum power transmission
and no reflections. The disadvantage is then the higher power consumption due to
the load resistance (50 Ω instead of e.g. 10 Ω), as well as the larger footprint due
to the long transmission lines.
92                                                                         CHAPTER 4


  On the other hand, lumped modulators have smaller electrodes, and are
typically limited by their RC constant. This translates to a bandwidth dependence
on the resistance of the modulator and the driver, and on the area of the modulator,
as will be explained later in the section. Two advantages of these modulators are
the lower power consumption (impedance matching can in principle be done by
controlling the driver’s impedance), and smaller footprint compared to travelling-
wave modulators. This work discusses lumped EAMs, unless stated otherwise.
   High modulation bandwidths are also possible using directly modulated DFB
laser diodes [12]. However, direct modulation at high frequencies often comes
with a large chirp. Electro-absorption modulation suffers less from this problem
and its bandwidth is limited only by the RC constant of the modulator. As the
junction capacitance decreases with decreasing width and length of the EAM, a
shorter and narrower EAM will result in a higher modulation bandwidth.
However, a small EAM area would limit the extinction ratio, so a compromise
must be sought. Although EAMs are advantageous, they have higher insertion
loss compared to directly modulated laser diodes.




Figure 4.3: (a) Applying an electric field to the quantum well results in (b) reducing the
effective bandgap and shifting the wave function due to the Quantum-confined Stark effect.




Figure 4.4: The absorption spectrum without applying an electric field (black), and with
small and large applied electric fields (blue, red) [13].
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                   93


   The operation of the device can be understood through the quantum-confined
Stark effect (QCSE). By applying an electric field, the effective bandgap of the
material is reduced, and the wave function is shifted, as illustrated in Fig. 4.3.
Reducing the effective bandgap means that electrons in the valence band can
absorb photons with a lower energy (higher wavelength) than the bandgap energy,
resulting in a shift of the absorption spectrum to higher wavelengths. This is also
illustrated in Fig. 4.4, in which the absorption spectrum is shown for different
applied electric fields [13]. The black curve shows the absorption spectrum with
no applied electric field. The absorption at the working wavelength increases with
increasing applied electric field. This is shown in the blue and red curves (small
and large applied electric fields), respectively.
  The QCSE is intrinsically very fast. What limits the speed of an EAM is the RC
constant, where 𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀 is the junction capacitance and 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑀 is determined by the
modulator’s series resistance 𝑅𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 and the output impedance of the
driver 𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟 . For example, a shorter modulator has the potential to increase the
bandwidth due to the reduced modulator area, and as a result reduced capacitance.
The resistance 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑀 , capacitance 𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀 and 3 dB modulation bandwidth 𝑓3𝑑𝐵 are
given by:

                        𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑀 = (𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑟 + 𝑅𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 )                         (4.1)

                                          1
                          𝑓3𝑅𝐶
                             𝑑𝐵 =                                           (4.2)
                                    2 𝜋 𝑅𝐸𝐴𝑀 𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀

                                          𝜀𝐴
                                 𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀 =                                     (4.3)
                                          𝑑

where 𝜀 is the dielectric constant, 𝐴 is the area of the modulator, and 𝑑 is the
thickness of the active region.

4.3      Design
  The 3D, top and side views of the proposed device are shown in Fig. 4.5 (a–c).
The adiabatic taper used for light coupling from the III-V waveguide to the silicon
waveguide [14] is used as an EAM [4]. The dimensions of the taper are shown in
Fig. 4.5 (d). The proposed device is based on that of [4], but with each 180 μm
long taper cut in two parts, and modulating only one of them. This is because a
shorter modulator would result in a higher bandwidth. As electro-absorption
modulation is only limited by the RC constant, structure optimization has the
potential to obtain very high modulation bandwidths. To sum up, the proposed
device consists of five sections: an active section in the middle, and two EAM
sections (EAM1, EAM2) on each side of the cavity.
  Since the performance can be affected by the electrical resistance of the
imperfect isolation, we decided to increase the length of the isolation etch from
14 μm in the two-section laser diodes and in [3], to 30 μm. Making the isolation
94                                                                     CHAPTER 4


region longer reduces the etching depth required to achieve a certain isolation
resistance. As p-InP etching is much faster than p-InGaAs, deep etching to
electrically isolate the layers can risk to introduce losses to the optical mode, and
consequently runs a risk of low optical output power. To understand more about
the benefit of a high electrical isolation resistance, it is useful to examine the
equivalent electrical circuit of the proposed device shown in Fig. 4.6. First, the
laser diode in series with the laser’s series resistance 𝑅𝐷𝐹𝐵 is the electrical
equivalent of the gain section. Second, the electrical isolation resistance 𝑅𝐼𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
is the electrical equivalent of the resistance due to p-InGaAs and p-InP etching.
Finally, the modulator’s capacitance CEAM in series with the modulator’s
resistance RSeries is the electrical equivalent of the modulated taper. The
higher 𝑅𝐼𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 , the lower the leakage current is between the two sections. Low
𝑅𝐼𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 leads to modulating the active region along with the EAM, which is not
desired. In our case, the resistance between EAM1 and the active section is 6 kΩ.
The isolation resistance of 6 kΩ is less than the one reported in chapter 3 of 13
kΩ because the etching was not at the same depth.
   The active laser section is 500 µm long and 2 µm wide. The EAM sections are
each 50 µm long. The isolation sections are 30 µm each, with half of the first
isolation section being in the taper. This makes the full taper length around 150
µm long. The width of the taper goes from 2 µm down to 0.7 µm. In principle,
either of the EAM sections can be used to modulate the light. However, in the first
EAM section, the light is confined more to the III-V waveguide, while in the
second EAM section the light is confined more to the silicon waveguide.
Therefore, more light will be absorbed when reverse biasing the first EAM
section, and a higher extinction ratio is expected.
   An advantage of this configuration is that when one section is used as an EAM,
the other section can be used as an SOA to increase the optical power. Moreover,
this configuration allows to perform PAM-4 experiments by modulating both
taper sections (EAM1, EAM2) if they have similar extinction ratio and modulation
bandwidth. Since that is not the case as will be thoroughly explained in the next
section, we were unable to perform a PAM-4 experiment.
   The InAlGaAs/InP epitaxial layer structure is bonded on a 400 nm thick SOI
that has a 500 µm long and 3.5 µm wide DFB grating etched 190 nm deep, with
a period of 248 nm and duty cycle of 50%. A quarter-wave phase shift is located
in the center of the grating. The silicon chip is made using electron beam
lithography at Ghent University. The fabrication procedure used is the standard
procedure discussed in chapter 2. However, since the InAlGaAs quantum wells
contain aluminum, the surface on the sidewalls oxidizes. This creates trap states
and surface recombination. The oxidation is removed by repeated immersion in
H2SO4:H2O2:H2O (1:1:20) and BHF:H2O (1:10). After that, the lasers are
immediately passivated using low temperature Si3N4, high temperature Si3N4, and
finally BCB. The rest of the fabrication process follows the standard procedure
summarized in chapter 2, and detailed in [15–17].
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                            95


         (a)




         (b)




         (c)




         (d)




Figure 4.5: (a) 3D, (b) top and (c) side views of the proposed externally-modulated DFB
laser diode. Two adiabatic tapers like the one in (d) are placed on each end, and cut in two
sections to be used as electro-absorption modulators.
96                                                                         CHAPTER 4




Figure 4.6: The equivalent electrical circuit of the DFB laser and the modulated taper

4.4       Characterization
4.4.1 Static characteristics
   The stage temperature (assumed to be close to the sample temperature) is fixed
at 15°C. The output light is coupled out of the chip by means of a grating coupler,
of which the coupling loss is 6 dB. The grating coupler loss is determined by
sending an optical signal at the desired wavelength over a straight waveguide with
two grating couplers (input and output grating couplers). The reported optical
power Pout throughout the chapter is the power in the Si waveguide (i.e. excluding
the losses in the grating coupler). The threshold current I th is around 30 mA. The
series resistance RDFB of the active section is 7.6 Ω. Fig. 4.7 shows the spectrum
for IDFB = 50 mA and VEAM = 0 V. The lasing peak is at 1570.6 nm with P out =
−4.4 dBm. To characterize the EAM, IDFB is fixed at 50 mA, and Pout is measured
at different VEAM of the first taper section as shown in Fig. 4.8 (a, b).




Figure 4.7: The optical spectrum of the laser showing single-mode operation at 1570.6 nm
for 50 mA laser bias current (without biasing the modulator).
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                           97




       (a)                                            (b)




Figure 4.8: Optical output power versus bias voltage of (a) the first taper section and (b)
the second taper section, while the current in the active region is fixed at 50 mA.




         (a)                                                      (c)
                                       (b)




Figure 4.9: The optical mode profiles at (a) the beginning of the taper, (b) middle of the
taper, and (c) end of the taper.

   One of the reasons to fabricate two taper sections was to perform a PAM-4
experiment, by modulating both tapers. For such an experiment, a similar
extinction ratio in both tapers is required. The measured extinction ratio for the
first and second section are shown in Fig. 4.8 (a, b). It is around 15 dB for the first
taper section, while it is less than 1 dB for the second taper section, when biased
between VEAM = 0 V and −1 V. This is because the current length of each taper
section is around 50% of the total taper length. However, since the optical mode
is mostly in the III-V waveguide in the first taper section, and mostly in the silicon
waveguide in the second taper section, the extinction ratio is higher for the first
section. Fig. 4.9 (a, b, c) show the optical mode profiles at the beginning of the
taper (mostly in the III-V waveguide), at the middle of the taper (hybrid mode
between the III-V and the silicon waveguides), and at the end of the taper (mostly
in the silicon waveguide).
  To obtain similar extinction ratios for both sections for the PAM-4 experiment,
the first taper section (with high optical confinement in the quantum wells) should
be shorter than the second taper section (with low optical confinement in the
quantum wells). Based on these findings, the focus in this experiment is on
modulating the first EAM section, while not pumping the second EAM section.
98                                                                     CHAPTER 4


4.4.2 Small signal modulation
  A small signal modulation experiment is performed using the setup shown in
Fig. 4.10. An Agilent N5247A VNA is used to provide electrical signals up to 67
GHz. The signal is superimposed on a negative bias, for reverse biasing the EAM,
using a 45 GHz bias tee. The signal is then used to modulate the EAM, while
biasing the DFB laser diode at IDFB = 50 mA using a Keithley current source. The
RF signal is applied using a Cascade Infinity Ground-Signal-Ground (GSG) RF
probe with 100 μm pitch. Due to the losses in the optical link (e.g. from the grating
couplers), and to accommodate the fact that no transimpedance amplifier was used
in the experiment, the signal is boosted using an Optolink L-band EDFA. The
output is fed to a Discovery DSC-10H photodetector with a bandwidth of 43 GHz.
Finally, the output electrical signal is fed back to the VNA.
  Fig. 4.11 shows the small signal modulation response S21 of the device. The
measured 3 dB modulation bandwidth of the device is around 33 GHz at IDFB =
55 mA and VEAM = −0.8 V. This is an improvement of around 30% compared to
the 25 GHz bandwidth reported in [4]. This improvement is in agreement with
what we expected theoretically based on the reduced modulated area of 25% and
thus the reduced capacitance as given in (4.2–3).
   After the light is modulated in the first taper section, the modulated light passes
to the second taper section, which modulates the carriers in the section. We
believe the 2 dB low frequency roll-off is due to the limited modulation response
of the second taper section. This poor low frequency response is not taken into
account in the calculation of the 3 dB bandwidth of the device, as it is
straightforward to minimize the spectral content at these low frequencies by
reducing the word length. Another solution is to apply 8b/10b line coding. This
coding maps 8-bits words to 10-bits symbols, to remove long sequences of 1’s
and 0’s, and to reduce low frequency bandwidth components.




Figure 4.10: Block diagram of the measurement setup used for small signal modulation
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                           99




Figure 4.11: Small signal modulation response S21 showing nearly 33 GHz 3 dB
modulation bandwidth at current of 55 mA and bias voltage of −0.8 V.

   The 3 dB modulation bandwidth can be estimated by measuring the input
impedance and fitting it to the theoretical one. This is done by first measuring the
reflection parameter S11 given by (4.4). The modulator is modelled by the
electrical equivalent circuit in Fig. 4.12, similar to the models reported in [19–22].
In this model, 𝑅𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 is the series resistance, 𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀 is the junction capacitance, 𝐶𝑃
is the parasitic capacitance, 𝐿𝑠 and 𝑅𝑠 are the inductance and resistance of the
metal wires, and 𝐺𝐸𝐴𝑀 is the conductance that represents the leakage of the
junction. Other parameters such the resistance and capacitance of the substrate, or
the generated photocurrent in the EAM, are not taken into account. The input
impedance Zin is given by (4.5). By fitting the measured impedance to the
theoretical one in Fig. 4.13, the following values are obtained: 𝑅𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 = 10 Ω,
𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀 = 46.5 fF, 𝐶𝑝 = 74.5 fF, 𝐿𝑠 = 1.43 nH, 𝑅𝑠 = 66.5 Ω, 𝐺𝐸𝐴𝑀 = 1.4 mS.

                                           𝑍𝑖𝑛 − 50
                                  𝑆11 =                                              (4.4)
                                           𝑍𝑖𝑛 + 50
                              𝐺𝐸𝐴𝑀                               1
                         (            + 𝑅𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 + 𝑅𝑠 + 𝑗𝑤𝐿𝑠 )
                             𝑗𝜔𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀                             𝑗𝜔𝐶𝑃
                 𝑍𝑖𝑛 =        𝐺𝐸𝐴𝑀                                1
                                                                                     (4.5)
                                      + 𝑅𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 + 𝑅𝑠 + 𝑗𝑤𝐿𝑠 +
                         𝑗𝜔𝐶𝐸𝐴𝑀                                 𝑗𝜔𝐶𝑃




Figure 4.12: The electrical equivalent circuit of the electro-absorption modulator
100                                                                      CHAPTER 4




Figure 4.13: Fitting the measured input impedance of the electro-absorption modulator to
the theoretical one of the electrical equivalent circuit

4.4.3 Large signal modulation
  Data transmission experiments were performed on the EML using the setup in
Fig. 4.14. An electrical signal is generated with a Keysight M8196A AWG. This
electrical signal is amplified by a 50 GHz RF electrical amplifier (SHF-S807).
Similarly to the small signal measurement, the data signal is superimposed on a
negative bias voltage.




Figure 4.14: Block diagram of the measurement setup used for large signal modulation
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                     101


   An L-band EDFA is used to boost the optical signal. The amplified
spontaneous emission is filtered out using a variable-bandwidth optical tunable
filter (Santec OTF-350). The bandwidth of the filter was set to 1 nm. The
resulting optical signal is fed to the photodetector, and finally, the output
electrical signal is fed to a Keysight DSAZ634A Real-Time Oscilloscope.
   A raised-cosine filter with a roll-off factor α = 0.1 is used to shape the
transmitted pulse of the AWG. Using the built-in channel de-embedding
function of the AWG, transmission of 50 and 80 Gbps NRZ PRBS with a word
length of 27−1 was demonstrated, as shown in Fig. 4.15. The eye diagrams for
back-to-back configuration, and after transmission over a 2 km long NZ-DSF
link are shown in Fig. 4.15 (a, c) and Fig. 4.15 (b, d), respectively. The used
Corning fiber had a 5 ps/nm⋅km dispersion.
   The voltage swing applied to the EAM is about 1.8 V pp. The device was
operating at IDFB = 49 mA and VEAM = −0.7 V. The optical bandwidth of the optical
tunable filter was 1 nm. The received optical power was 5 dBm (note that no
transimpedance amplifier was present at the receiver). The recorded BER was
around 1.5 ⋅ 10−4, which is below the KP4-FEC limit of 2.2 ⋅ 10−4.

                   (a)



                  (b)



                  (c)



                  (d)




Figure 4.15: Sub-HD-FEC transmission at 50 Gbps and 80 Gbps (a, c) in the back-to-
back configuration, and (b, d) with a 2 km NZ-DSF link, for a pattern length of 27−1.

  The measured BER versus received power for this transmitter is shown in Fig.
4.16. To obtain different power levels at the receiver side and their BER, an
optical attenuator is placed before the photodetector. 80 Gbps PRBS transmission
with a word length of (27–1) and a BER lower than the 7% HD-FEC limit of 3.8
⋅ 10−3 is possible for a received power less than 0 dBm. It is observed that
102                                                                 CHAPTER 4


increasing the word length to 215 increases the BER. This can be explained by
looking back at the small signal modulation response in Fig. 4.11, in which the
low frequency response has a 2 dB roll-off. This low frequency part becomes
significant when bit combinations with low frequencies (many consecutive 1’s or
0’s) become more probable.




Figure 4.16: Bit-error-rate vs. received power showing sub-HD-FEC operation for 80
Gbps for a received power below 0 dBm.
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                       103


4.5      Conclusion
  We have demonstrated data transmission of an 80 Gbps NRZ-OOK signal, with
a 33 GHz modulation bandwidth electro-absorption modulation of III-V-on-Si
DFB laser diodes. Both back-to-back configuration and transmission over a 2 km
long NZ-DSF link was investigated. BERs below the 7% HD-FEC threshold using
feed-forward equalization were demonstrated. Table 4.1 summarizes the
performance of the device, compared to other demonstrated electro-absorption
modulated laser diodes.

Table 4.1: Comparison between some demonstrations in the literature and this work
                            [4]         [5]         [7]         [9]         This
                                                                           work
    Platform             III-V/Si     GeSi         III-V     III-V/Si     III-V/Si
  Modulator type         Lumped      Lumped      Lumped        TW         Lumped
 Modulation speed         2 × 56       100        2 × 56        50           80
     (Gbps)
   Small signal             25         >50          35          42           33
 bandwidth (GHz)

   In comparison to the other III-V-on-silicon lasers, our lasers had a 3 dB
modulation bandwidth of 33 GHz, which is around 30% improvement compared
to the 25 GHz bandwidth reported in [4]. The modulation bandwidth is less than
the travelling-wave modulator in [9], which is normally longer than a lumped
modulator. However, transmission experiment shows that a modulation speed of
80 Gbps is possible.
  The performance is similar to the 35 GHz modulation bandwidth reported for
the monolithic III-V laser [7], with similar device dimensions. However, the
bandwidth of our device falls behind in comparison to the bandwidth of the 50
GHz GeSi EAM demonstrated in [5–6]. On the other hand, the GeSi EAM has a
lower static extinction ratio compared to our device (4.8 versus 15 dB).
  In general, there is still room for improvement and to obtain a higher
modulation bandwidth. This can be done by further optimization of the device
dimensions, i.e. attempting to design shorter and/or narrower EAMs. Also, PAM-
4 experiments using both tapers can be part of future work.
104                                                                        CHAPTER 4


References
[1] C. Kachris, K. Kanonakis, and I. Tomkos, “Optical Interconnection Networks in Data
Centers: Recent Trends and Future Challenges”, IEEE Communications Magazine, 51(9),
(2013).
[2] D. Cunningham, “Trends in Data Rate and Link Length in Evolving Optical Standards”,
European conference on optical communication (ECOC), WS4 - Technologies for Short
Reach Optical Interconnects, (2013).
[3] A. Abbasi, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G.-H. Duan, G. Roelkens,
G. Morthier, “Direct and electro-absorption modulation of a III-V-on-silicon DFB laser at
56 Gbps,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 23(6), p. 1501307,
(2017).
[4] A. Abbasi, L. Abdollahi Shiramin, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck,
D. Van Thourhout, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “III-V-on-Silicon C-band High-Speed
Electro-Absorption Modulated DFB Laser,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 36(2),
pp.252–257, (2018).
[5] J. Verbist, M. Verplaetse, A. Srinivasan, J. Van Kerrebroeck, P. De Heyn, P. Absil, T.
De Keulenaer, R. Pierco, A. Vyncke, G. Torfs, X. Yin, G. Roelkens, J. Van Campenhout,
J. Bauwelinck, “Real-time 100 Gb/s NRZ and EDB transmission with a GeSi electro-
absorption modulator for short-reach optical interconnects,” Journal of Lightwave
Technology, 36(1), p.90–96, (2018).
[6] A. Srinivasan, M. Pantouvaki, S. Gupta, H. Chen, P. Verheyen, G. lepage, G. Roelkens,
K. Saraswat, D. Van Thourhout, P. Absil, J. Van Campenhout, “56Gb/s Germanium
Waveguide Electro-Absorption Modulator,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 34(2),
pp.419–424, (2016).
[7] M. Theurer, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Chen, L. Chen, Zeng, U. Troppenz, G. Przyrembel,
A. Sigmund, M. Moehrle, and M. Schell, “2 × 56 GB/s From a Double Side
Electroabsorption Modulated DFB Laser and Application in Novel Optical PAM4
Generation,” Journal of lightwave technology, 35(4), pp. 706–710, (2017).
[8] Y. Tang, J. D. Peters, and J. E. Bowers, “Over 67 GHz bandwidth hybrid silicon
electroabsorption modulator with asymmetric segmented electrode for 1.3 μm
transmission,” Optics Express, 20(10), pp. 11529–11535, (2012).
[9] Y. Tang, H.-W. Chen, S. Jain, J. D. Peters, U. Westergren, and J. E. Bowers, “50 Gb/s
hybrid silicon traveling-wave electroabsorption modulator,” Opt. Express, 19(7), pp.
5811–5816, (2011).
[10] T. Ferrotti, “Design, fabrication and characterization of a hybrid III-V on silicon
transmitter for high-speed communications,” PhD thesis, (2016).
[11] A. Abbasi, J. Verbist, L. Abdollahi Shiramin, M. Verplaetse, T. De Keulenaer, R.
Vaernewyck, R. Pierco, A. Vyncke, X. Yin, G. Torfs, G. Morthier, J. Bauwelinck, G.
Roelkens, “100-Gb/s Electro-Absorptive Duobinary Modulation of an InP-on-Si DFB
Laser,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 30(12), pp. 1095–1098, (2018).
[12] Y. Matsui, R. Schatz, T. Pham, W. A. Ling, G. Carey, H. M. Daghighian, D. Adams,
T. Sudo, and C. Roxlo, “55 GHz Bandwidth Distributed Reflector Laser,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, 35(3), pp. 397–403, (2017).
ELECTRO-ABSORPTION MODULATED DFB LASER DIODES                                      105


[13] M. Tassaert, “Leveraging High Index Contrast in the III-V Waveguide Platform on
Silicon-on-Insulator for Optical Signal Processing Applications,” PhD thesis, (2014).
[14] M. Lamponi, S. Keyvaninia, C. Jany, F. Poingt, F. Lelarge, G. de Valicourt, G.
Roelkens, D. Van Thourhout, S. Messaoudene, J. –M. Fedeli, and G. H. Duan, “Low-
Threshold Heterogeneously Integrated InP/SOI Lasers With a Double Adiabatic Taper
Coupler,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, 24(1), pp. 76–78, (2012).
[15] G. Roelkens, A. Abbasi, P. Cardile, U.D. Dave, A. De Groote, Y. De Koninck, S.
Dhoore, X. Fu, A. Gassenq, N. Hattasan, Q. Huang, S. Kumari, S. Keyvaninia, B. Kuyken,
L. Li, P. Mechet, M. Muneeb, D. Sanchez, H. Shao, T. Spuesens, A. Subramanian, S. Uvin,
M. Tassaert, K. Van Gasse, J. Verbist, R. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Van Campenhout,
Y. Xin, J. Bauwelinck, G. Morthier, R. Baets, D. Van Thourhout, “III-V-on-Silicon
Photonic Devices for Optical Communication and Sensing,” Photonics (3), pp. 969–1004,
(2015).
[16] A. Abbasi, “High speed directly modulated III-V-on-Silicon DFB lasers,” PhD thesis,
(2016).

[17] S. Dhoore, “Heterogeneously Integrated III-V-on-Silicon Wavelength-Tunable DFB
and DBR Lasers,” PhD thesis, (2018).

[18] M. Lamponi, “Hybrid III-V on silicon lasers for telecommunication applications,”
PhD thesis, (2012).
[19] G. L. Li, P. K. L. Yu, W. S. C. Chang, K. K. Loi, C. K. Sun, and S. A. Pappert,
“Concise RF equivalent circuit model for electroabsorption modulators,” Electronics
Letters, 36(9), pp. 818–820, (2000).

[20] Y. Chiu, S. Z. Zhang, V. Kaman, J. Piprek, J. Edward Bowers, “High-speed traveling-
wave electro-absorption modulators,” Proceedings SPIE 4490, Multifrequency
Electronic/Photonic Devices and Systems for Dual-Use Applications, (2001).

[21] H. Wang, R. Zhang, D. Lu, C. Ji, “Simulation and experiment of 1310nm high speed
InGaAsP/InP EAM,” Proceedings SPIE 9270, Optoelectronic Devices and Integration V,
927005 (2014).

[22] H. Ramon, J. Lambrecht, J. Verbist, M. Vanhoecke, S. A. Srinivasan, P. De Heyn, J.
Van Campenhout, P. Ossieur, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, “70 Gb/s Low-Power DC-Coupled
NRZ Differential Electro-Absorption Modulator Driver in 55 nm SiGe BiCMOS,” Journal
of lightwave technology, 37(5), (2019).
      5 Compact DFB laser diodes
                                                                    5
Contents
        5.1 Introduction ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 107
        5.2 Design and fabrication ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 108
        5.3 Static laser characteristics ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 111
        5.4 Conclusion ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 113
        References ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 113


5.1      Introduction
   A lot of work has been done, including the devices demonstrated throughout
this work, to enhance the bandwidth and modulation speed of InP-on-silicon DFB
laser diodes. In some recent work, the modulation speed demonstrated was 56
Gbps for direct modulation [1], and 2 x 56 Gbps using electro-absorption
modulation of both tapers individually [2]. The tapers demonstrated are adiabatic,
and are typically 230 μm long. In chapter 4, we separated the tapers into two
sections, and modulated only one section, in comparison to modulating the full
section in [2]. Since the section was shorter, the capacitance was decreased,
leading to an increase of the modulation bandwidth and speed.
  To improve the results further, the modulated section should be as short as
possible. However, these tapers must be long enough to ensure efficient light
coupling from the III-V to the silicon waveguide. One can think of making one of
the two taper sections very short to improve the modulation bandwidth further.
The issue then is that the extinction ratio would drop. To solve these issues, a new
taper design must be considered.




                                        107
108                                                                         CHAPTER 5


   Other than improving the modulation bandwidth and speed, it is important to
design lasers with a small footprint and low power consumption. In the current
lasers, the DFB grating length is typically 300 μm, with a taper length of 230 μm
on each end. This makes the total length of the device around 800 μm. In this
chapter, we aim to minimize the footprint to reduce the power consumption and
to demonstrate compact laser diodes. This is done by a one-stage taper of both the
III-V and the silicon waveguides, as shown in [3]. This allows shrinking the length
of the taper to less than 60 μm, which is around 4 times shorter than the current
design. As a result, the footprint of the device is around 2 times smaller. Since the
tapers are short, using them for electro-absorption modulation could result in
higher modulation bandwidth than the one demonstrated in chapter 4. The
epitaxial structure used for this device is based on an InAlGaAs active region. It
has 10 quantum wells instead of 8 quantum wells in chapter 4, since it was
optimized for high speed performance. However, the focus in this chapter is rather
on the taper design, fabrication and characterization, as we do not cover the high
speed performance.
  In this chapter, we demonstrate compact InP-on-silicon DFB laser diodes. First,
we will show the design parameters used to achieve good coupling. Then, we will
show simulations for different taper lengths. Finally, we will show the static
characteristics of the fabricated laser devices.

5.2       Design and fabrication
  The design of the taper is based on [3], in which a taper as short as 40 μm shows
around 95% of the light coupling from the III-V to the silicon waveguide. The
design shows a silicon taper with a waveguide width varying between 4 μm and
500 nm, sitting below a III-V taper with a width varying between 3 μm and 150
nm, as shown in Fig. 5.1 [3]. Fig. 5.2 shows the coupling efficiency versus taper
length, for three different silicon waveguide thicknesses: 400, 300 and 220 nm.
This shows that a taper length of 40 μm should be sufficient to couple the light
for all the different waveguide thicknesses.




Figure 5.1: 3D schematic of the III-V-on-silicon laser with single-stage taper structure [3]
COMPACT DFB LASER DIODES                                                              109




                                        Taper Length (μm)

Figure 5.2: Coupling efficiency versus taper length from the III-V to the silicon waveguide
for different waveguide thicknesses [3]

   The challenging part in the design in [3] is to make a III-V taper tip of 150 nm
since this requires e-beam lithography. To relax this requirement, and to make the
fabrication possible with UV lithography tools, we designed the III-V taper tip to
be 550 nm wide. As discussed earlier, the V-shape of the mesa causes the mesa
width at the bottom to be smaller than on the top. In the case of the 500 nm wide
tip on the top, the mesa width at the bottom would be around 150 nm, which is
already challenging to fabricate.
   The 3D view of the laser structure with the single-stage taper design is shown
in Fig. 5.3. The laser cavity consists of a DFB grating of 300 μm and two single-
stage taper structures at both ends.




Figure 5.3: 3D schematic of the fabricated compact DFB laser diode
110                                                                        CHAPTER 5


   A 3D FDTD simulation using Lumerical showing a sweep of different taper
lengths (20, 40, 60 µm) versus the power transmission from the III-V waveguide
to the underlying silicon waveguide is shown in Fig. 5.4. In the same figure, the
reflection back into the III-V waveguide is also shown. A taper tip with a width
of 500 nm is assumed during the simulation, as well as a V-shape mesa. The
performance of the 150 µm long traditional adiabatic taper used in chapter 4 is
also compared. The simulations are done for two cases: (1) perfect alignment (i.e.
the III-V mesa sits exactly in the center of the silicon waveguide below), and (2)
assuming a 300 nm misalignment.




Figure 5.4: 3D FDTD simulations showing the transmission to the silicon waveguide and
the reflection back into the III-V waveguide, with different taper lengths (20, 40, and 60
µm), in comparison to the traditional 150 µm long adiabatic taper, with perfect alignment
and with 300 nm misalignment

   It is shown in the simulations that the traditional 150 µm long taper has a
significantly higher transmission (nearly 80% versus 60%) and lower reflection
(nearly 3% versus 6%) than the shorter taper structure.
  Ideally, a perfect alignment of the III-V mesa structure on top of the silicon is
desired. However, during the mesa definition lithography, a misalignment of 200
– 300 nm is expected. Fig. 5.5 (a–b) show how the mesa would be located with
respect to the silicon waveguide in case of (a) perfect alignment versus (b) with a
300 nm misalignment. Since the taper tip width is comparable to the silicon
waveguide width, around half of the taper’s tip will not be on top of the silicon
waveguide. Since the coupling region is very short, misalignment is expected to
decrease the coupling. This is also predicted by the simulation in Fig. 5.4.
  Finally, Fig. 5.6 (a, b) shows a comparison between the dimensions of both the
previous (long) taper design used in chapter 3, chapter 4, and in [1], and the
proposed (short) taper design.
COMPACT DFB LASER DIODES                                                           111




                                    (a)                                          (b)



Figure 5.5: Top view with (a) a perfect alignment versus (b) a 300 nm misalignment
illustrating the criticality of misalignment


          (a)




                     (b)


                              III-V
                              Si

Figure 5.6: A comparison between (a) the previous (long) taper design in [1] and (b) the
proposed (short) taper design.

5.3      Static laser characteristics
   The optical output power in the waveguide versus the bias current for different
taper lengths (60, 40, and 20 µm) is shown in Fig. 5.7. Initially, we expect the
laser with a long taper to have higher power levels than the laser with a short taper.
However, we notice that the lasers with a 60 µm long taper have a lower optical
output power than the lasers with a 20 µm long taper. The optical output power
can also change depending on the quality of the tapers and the fabrication
variations from one device to another. A misalignment of around 100 nm for the
device with a 60 µm long taper is shown in SEM image in Fig. 5.8, which is better
than the typical misalignment for our devices (200 – 300 nm). As suggested earlier
by the simulations, even with a considerably good misalignment of 100 nm, the
device still have a poor optical output power.
112                                                                        CHAPTER 5




Figure 5.7: Optical output power (in the waveguide) versus bias current for the fabricated
lasers with 60, 40 and 20 µm taper lengths




Figure 5.8: SEM image of the cross section of the fabricated device obtained using FIB,
showing a misalignment of around 100 nm between the III-V and the silicon waveguide.

   The maximum optical output power in the waveguide is around 2 mW as shown
in Fig. 5.7, compared to e.g. 6 mW reported in [1] for a standard single-section
DFB laser with a 230 µm long taper. The lower optical output power was
anticipated in the simulation results in Fig. 5.4. It can also be attributed to the high
series resistance of around 25 Ω, compared to e.g. 10 Ω in chapter 3 or 8 Ω in
chapter 4. This is suspected to create more heating, which reduces the optical
output power. There are two reasons for the higher series resistance: (1) the lower
p-InP doping concentration (here 1.0 ⋅ 1018 cm-3 -> 1.5 ⋅ 1018 cm-3 versus 0.5 ⋅ 1018
cm-3 -> 1.0 ⋅ 1018 cm-3 in the one of chapter 4), and (2) the thinner n-type InP (150
nm versus 200 nm in the one of chapter 4).
COMPACT DFB LASER DIODES                                                            113


   It appears that the lower optical output power is not the only concern. The
device also exhibits a multi-mode behavior as shown in Fig. 5.9, which can be a
result of the reflections, as anticipated by Fig. 5.4, on top of the 4% reflections
from the grating couplers [1].




Figure 5.9: Optical spectrum showing a multimode behavior, likely due to the reflections
caused by the taper structure, in addition to the reflections from the grating couplers.

5.4      Conclusion
Compact InP-on-Si DFB laser diodes were demonstrated. The lasers are around
400 μm long, which is half the footprint of the previously demonstrated lasers.
This is achieved by a single-stage taper which is 60 μm long. The optical output
power in the silicon waveguide is 1 mW, which is lower than in the previously
demonstrated lasers. Using e-beam for the patterning of the laser structure could
allow smaller width of the taper tip, which could improve the optical output
power.

References
[1] A. Abbasi, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, G.-H. Duan, G. Roelkens,
G. Morthier, “Direct and electro-absorption modulation of a III-V-on-silicon DFB laser at
56 Gbps,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 23(6), p. 1501307,
(2017).
[2] A. Abbasi, L. Abdollahi Shiramin, B. Moeneclaey, J. Verbist, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck,
D. Van Thourhout, G. Roelkens, G. Morthier, “2x56 Gbps Electroabsorption Modulated
III-V-on-silicon DFB Laser,” European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC),
p. M.2.C.3, (2017).
114                                                                    CHAPTER 5


[3] J. Pu, V. Krishnamurthy, D. K. Ting Ng, K. P. Lim, C-W Lee, K. Tang, A. Y. S. Kay,
T-H Loh, F. Tjiptoharsono, and Q. Wang, “Heterogeneous Integrated III–V Laser on Thin
SOI With Single-Stage Adiabatic Coupler: Device Realization and Performance Analysis,”
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronic 21(6), p. 1501808 (2015).
         6 Conclusion and prospects
                                                                   6
6.1 Conclusion
Throughout this thesis, we have demonstrated novel heterogeneously integrated
III-V-on-silicon DFB lasers. We started by putting this work in context, and
showing the advantages of optical interconnects over electrical interconnects. We
showed the significance of silicon photonics and consequently heterogeneous III-
V-on-silicon integration. We also introduced modulation schemes and techniques.
   Next, we provided an overview of the theory of lasers, focusing on DFB laser
diodes. Advantages and disadvantages of monolithic III-V and heterogeneous III-
V-on-silicon integration were outlined. The fabrication process was briefly
introduced, with mentioning the fabrication challenges. The adiabatic taper
structure used for all the devices for coupling light from the III-V to the silicon
waveguide was introduced.
   After that, two-section DFB laser diodes were used for three different purposes.
These were self-pulsating DFB lasers, bandwidth-enhanced lasers, and power-
efficient lasers. Firstly, self-pulsating DFB lasers with tunable repetition
frequencies between 12 and 40 GHz, and narrow RF spectral linewidth of 0.1 Hz
under locking were reported. These are useful for the generation of optical
microwave carriers for radio-over-fiber applications. Secondly, the same structure
with different bias currents was also used to enhance the bandwidth, in
comparison to that of an equivalent standard single-section DFB laser. A
modulation bandwidth of 25 GHz was achieved, which led to a modulation speed
of 45 Gbps NRZ-OOK. Thirdly, a similar two-section laser configuration was
used for DFB lasers with record low threshold current of 4.5 mA.
  Next, an externally modulated single-section DFB laser was demonstrated. The
adiabatic tapers were cut into two sections, and only one section was used as an
electro-absorption modulator. This results in a smaller modulator area than the


                                       115
116                                                                    CHAPTER 6

previous design, which increases the modulation bandwidth and speed. A
modulation bandwidth of 33 GHz and a speed of 80 Gbps NRZ-OOK were
demonstrated.
  Finally, a compact DFB laser structure was demonstrated, using an alternative
short taper design. The tapers was shrunk from 230 to 60 μm each. Since the
DFB section is typically around 300 μm, the total device length was reduced from
760 to 420 μm. In addition to the small footprint, this taper helps to reduce the
power consumption in the laser diode. Finally, fabrication challenges and
limitations were discussed.

6.2 Prospects
In this section, suggestions to improve the performance of the different reported
devices are given as follows.

6.2.1    Self-heating

   As mentioned in chapter 2, the effect of heating is evident in our laser diodes at
high bias currents, especially in short lasers. Heating gives the electrons the
energy to escape the quantum wells and it also broadens the gain spectrum and
reduces therefore the peak gain, which limits the maximum output optical power.
This is attributed to the 2 µm thick buried oxide layer which traps the heat and
prevents efficient heat sinking to the substrate. A solution could be to optimize
the MQW to have a higher conduction band offset, such that the temperature
stability is higher. Improving the laser efficiency would also reduce the heating
effect. Finally, bonding the entire InP-on-silicon laser p-side down on a heat
spreader could also help in heat sinking.

6.2.2    III-V-on-silicon laser / photodetector (transceiver)

  In chapter 4, we demonstrated an EML with modulation speed of 80 Gbps NRZ-
OOK by using one of the taper sections as an EAM. In principle, the taper could
also be used as a photodetector. Therefore it is possible to fabricate a transceiver,
by using, e.g. the right taper as a modulator, while at the same time using the left
taper as a detector [1].

6.2.3    Ultra-high modulation speed beyond 80 Gbps

   The modulation bandwidth can be increased by fabricating a shorter modulator.
However, the extinction ratio would decrease. Therefore a compromise must be
sought. Moreover, performing a PAM-4 experiment on the EML in chapter 4
would double the achieved bitrate of the laser. For that, the extinction ratio of both
taper sections should be similar. This was not the case here, because the optical
mode was mainly in the III-V waveguide in the first taper section, and in the
silicon waveguide in the second taper section. An improvement would be to
decrease the length of the first taper section, and increase the length of the second
taper section. This would decrease the extinction ratio in the first taper section,
CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTS                                                             117

and increase it in the second. However, this will also decrease the bandwidth of
the second taper section. Therefore, a compromise must be sought.

Reference
[1] B. Schrenk, and F. Karinou, “Simple laser transmitter pair as polarization independent
coherent homodyne detector,” Optics Express, 27(10), pp. 13942–13950, (2019).
