possible, while the authors in [23], wanted a slightly wider band in order to reject a broad
baseband data stream.
In conclusion, while the receiver demonstrated in this Chapter performs the desired
function it is complicated and places heavy demands on both photodetector bandwidth as
well as the reflection mode suppression of a fiber fabry Perot which is difficult to achieve
and unreliable in practice. A simpler solution must be found, or such components must
become more stable if this kind of receiver is to become practical. The demonstration of
coherent frequency shifting without the use of a local oscillator, however, opens the door
to a number of techniques that hitherto were regarded as impractical owing to the phase
locking and polarization tracking complications of a local oscillator. Some of these
techniques are discussed in Chapter 5.

41

Chapter 5 Multifunctional microwave fiber optic links using a
dual-electrode Mach-Zehnder modulator.

The interest in fiber-optic microwave and millimeter wave links has also
prompted interest in experiments demonstrating the feasibility of implementation of
different radio-system functionalities over RF photonic links, however in the past these
investigations have involved the use of complex laser sources [26], or they have involved
the use of an optical local oscillator [27]. In this chapter, we present various microwave
optical link experiments, which demonstrate the implementation of multiple microwave
system functionalities in the optical domain without the use of an optical local oscillator.
All the experiments are centered around the dual-electrode Mach-Zehnder modulator and
most of them will be described as a simple reconfiguration of the transmitter described in
Chapter 3 or the receiver described in Chapter 4. This device and combinations of such
devices demonstrate great potential for integration and hence may make viable candidates
for future economical RF photonic systems.
We will demonstrate the following functionalities, depending on how the
transmitter and the receiver in the link are constructed and operated:
1) a frequency shifting optical link that takes an input microwave signal and shifts it
to another specified microwave frequency. A frequency doubling optical link,
which is a more specific version of the above;
2) an optical link that accomplishes spectral inversion of an input microwave signal.
This is useful for recompressing chirped RF pulses with the same circuit that was
used to stretch them;

42

3) a down-converting optical RF link that down-converts input RF signals to
baseband, thus reducing photodetector bandwidth requirements and eliminating
the need for subsequent microwave down-conversion;
4) an RF photonic link that transports direct sequence microwave CDMA signals
over optical links and accomplishes code-selective frequency conversion of
selected channels enabling optical demultiplexing of CDMA channels.

5.1 RF Frequency translation and frequency doubling in optical links.
The purpose of this kind of link is to take as input, the original RF signal and the
desired frequency shift, to transport the signal across the optical link and to deliver the
frequency shifted or frequency doubled signal to the output. It turns out that this function
is particularly easy to achieve using a tandem single sideband modulator. We use the
USB to carry the microwave data and we use the LSB to carry an RF single tone, which
is placed appropriately distant from the carrier frequency in order to provide the desired
frequency shift. The maximum frequency shift obtainable from the optical link depends
on the bandwidth of the modulator and the photodetector. In the case of the modulator the
maximum frequency shift is exactly equal to the electrical bandwidth of the modulator,
and in the case of the photodetector, the desired microwave signal after the frequency
shift, should lie within the bandwidth of the photodetector. Complete phase correlation is
present between the upper and lower sidebands at the transmitter, but chromatic
dispersion may induce some phase decorrelation which may in turn cause phase noise in
the recovered microwave signal [24]. Frequency doubling is achieved as a special case of

43

frequency shifting wherein the single tone applied to the lower sideband is exactly equal
in frequency to the carrier frequency of the microwave signal applied to the USB.
Fig. 6.1a and b show the expected optical and RF spectra and Fig. 6.2c shows the
measured microwave spectra from a frequency doubling tandem single sideband link.

Optical

ω−6

ω+6

ω

ω−6

(a)

ω

ω+6

0

6

Microwave

12

6

0

GHz

12

GHz

(b)
20

-10
-20

0

Power (dBm)

Power (dBm)

-30
-20

-40

-40
-50
-60

-60

-70
-80
3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

-80

15

3

Frequency (GHz)

4

5

6

(c)

7

8

9

10

11

12

Frequency (GHz)

Figure 5.1 Expected a)optical and b)microwave spectra after photodetection
obtained from a frequency doubling tandem single sideband link. The measured
microwave spectra in c) show the frequency doubling effect when the single tone is
placed in the lower sideband. No frequency doubling effect is seen when the signal is
placed in the upper sideband. The microwave signal at the original frequency of 6
GHz can be eliminated by using a carrier suppression modulator.

44

13

14

15

The performance of this kind of link would be enhanced if a carrier suppression
modulator were employed. We did not possess such a modulator at the time of this
experiment, hence an unwanted out of band signal can be seen at the original microwave
frequency. Recent designs of such carrier suppression modulators [28, 29] show great
promise for the applications in this chapter.

5.2 RF Spectral Inversion over an RF photonic link
The purpose of this link is to spectrally invert and input microwave signal and supply the
inverted signal at either the same carrier frequency or at a different carrier frequency at
the output. Both the original signal and a single tone frequency higher than the carrier
frequency of the original signal are placed in the USB of an optical carrier. If the original
carrier frequency is desired, then the frequency would have to be double the carrier
frequency. In this case, a carrier suppression modulator such as the one described in [28]
would have to be used.
A second way to accomplish spectral inversion would be in a receiver scheme such
as the one described in Chapter 4. It is clear from Fig. 4.2 that the up-shift in the second
dual-electrode modulator and the subsequent beating of the LSB with the original optical
carrier, causes the LSB to be spectrally inverted in the microwave domain. This kind of
link is useful since the same microwave circuit that was used to stretch a chirped RF
pulse, may be used to recompress it.

45

5.3 Downconverting RF photonic link
In this kind of link the microwave signal and it’s carrier are placed in the upper sideband.
If the input microwave signal is suppressed carrier, the carrier must be recovered by the
use of electrical circuitry such as a Costas loop [18] in order to ensure exact phase and
frequency matching. We had the luxury of having the carrier source in close physical
proximity to the experiment, enabling exact phase and frequency matching with relative
ease.
At the photodetector, the input microwave signal appears in the baseband, since its
carrier is also transmitted. Fig. 6.1 shows the expected and measured microwave spectra
for this case. Since the original carrier was not suppressed, a signal at the original RF
carrier frequency is also expected. This can be suppressed by employing a carrier
suppression modulator.
A second way to achieve frequency down-conversion is to employ the receiver
DE-MZM described in Chapter 4 in LSB mode rather than in USB mode. The net effect
will be to shift the whole optical spectrum down. If the appropriate sub-carrier frequency
is chosen for down-shift, then the sideband will superimpose itself on the original optical
carrier and may be directly detected. A down-shifted carrier suppression filter similar to
the one employed in Chapter 4, will have to be used of course. Further experimental
investigations in this regard are currently in progress.

46

5.4 Code-selective RF photonic mixing
The need for multiple access techniques in local area networks has inspired interest
in optical code division multiple access (OCDMA), however due to the absence of optical
devices capable of adding or dropping channels based on their codes, such networks are
generally of a broadcast and select nature. A recent demonstration of OCDMA add-drop
multiplexers [30], requires that all channels be received at the photodetector, with
undesired channels being cancelled due to orthogonal coding. Receiving all channels at
once from within the same bandwidth causes deleterious effects such as cumulative shot
noise and speckle, which can seriously limit the number of simultaneous users [31]. In
this section, we demonstrate a technique that coherently frequency shifts a direct
sequence encoded optical channel by mixing it with an identically encoded RF local
oscillator in a dual-electrode Mach-Zehnder modulator (DE-MZM). The spectral
separation would reduce the effects of cumulative shot noise and speckle, and full code
orthogonality is possible since the bipolar nature of the optical field is recognized by the
frequency shifting process.
Figure 6.2 shows a block diagram of the experimental setup. For experimental
convenience we do not encode the optical carrier itself but impose an encoded subcarrier
on it. Using the subcarrier as an encoded optical carrier allows us to heterodyne the
spectrum against the original un-encoded optical carrier to produce a microwave
spectrum observable on an RF spectrum analyzer. The light source is a laser diode at foc
GHz coupled into a DE-MZM which is connected in upper single sideband (USB)
configuration [5]. To begin with we apply a ‘pure’, unencoded 6 GHz single tone to the

47

first DE-MZM with no code imposed. This results in a ‘pure’ tone at (foc+6) GHz
observable at 6 GHz on the spectrum analyzer as shown in Fig. 6.3a [5]. Applying a 1.5
MHz BPSK code C1(t) corresponding to the (1010) row of a 4x4 Hadamard matrix, to
the 6 GHz frequency results in a ‘noisy’, encoded carrier at (foc+6) GHz observable at 6
GHz as shown in Fig. 6.3b. The BPSK modulation converts the 1s and 0s to phases of 0
and π, thus ensuring the bipolar nature of the code. At the decoder, we apply a low
modulation depth 3 GHz signal with code C2(t) to the second DE-MZM, also in USB
configuration. This had the effect of up-shifting the signal at (foc+6) GHz to (foc+9) GHz
as in Chapter 4. The optical signal was then amplified and photodetected, and the signals
at 6 GHz and 9 GHz were observed on an RF spectrum analyzer.

Dual-electrode
modulator

Dual-electrode
modulator

DC

DC

LASER

o

o

EDFA

o

o

90
0
o
90 hybrid

90
0
o
90 hybrid

Photodetector

BPSK

6 GHz

(1010)

3 GHz BPSK

Microwave
Spectrum Analyzer

(1010)/(1001)

Code
Generator

Code
Generator C2(t)

ENCODER

DECODER

Figure 5.2 Experimental setup to demonstrate code-selective RF photonic mixing

48

-25

-30

-30

-35

-35
Power (dBm)

Power (dBm)

-25

-40
-45
-50

-40
-45
-50

-55

-55

-60

-60

-65
5.997

5.998

5.999

6.000

6.001

6.002

-65
5.997

6.003

5.998

5.999

6.000

6.001

6.002

6.003

Frequency (GHz)

Frequency (GHz)

(a)

(b)

Figure 5.3 Signal obtained at 6 GHz after heterodyning with original optical carrier
for a) “pure” unencoded sub-carrier and b) “noisy” sub-carrier encoded with 1.5
MHz chip-rate (1010) code.

We observed the signal at 9 GHz for two different cases of C2. Case 1. Code C2 is
identical to C1, i.e. both were (1010) but delayed by an appropriate amount to
compensate for the delay through the system. Fig 3a shows the ‘pure’ un-encoded carrier
recovered at 9 GHz. The delay for C2 was tuned to get best carrier recovery. Case 2.
Code C2 is chosen to be (1001) i.e. orthogonal to C1, and tuned to get best carrier
suppression at 9 GHz, delayed by the same amount as in case 1. In Fig. 3b no carrier is
seen at 9 GHz indicating that the up-shift is indeed code selective.

49

-25

-30

-30

-35

-35
Power (dBm)

Power (dBm)

-25

-40
-45
-50

-40
-45
-50

-55

-55

-60

-60

-65
8.997

8.998

8.999

9.000

9.001

9.002

-65
8.997

9.003

8.998

8.999

9.000

9.001

Frequency (GHz)

Frequency (GHz)

(a)

(b)

9.002

Figure 5.4 Signal obtained at 9 GHz after heterodyning with original optical carrier
when code C2(t) is a) (1010) i.e. identical to C1(t) and b) (1001) i.e. orthogonal to
C1(t). The carrier is recovered at 9 GHz when the codes are matched. Unmatched
codes are rejected indicating the code-selectivity of the wavelength shift.

5.5 Conclusions
Several radio-system functionalities were demonstrated in this chapter. Most of
them were implemented through the simple modification of the SSB or TSSB transmitter
or receiver. While the proposals are feasible enough from the point of view of the design,
further tests need to be done to determine the link performance. The ability to implement
these radio system functions while simultaneously achieving transport of an RF signal
may have a great deal of application in the fiber-wireless area. In addition the frequency
doubling and shifting link described in 5.1 may be used to transport low phase noise RF
local oscillators. The phase noise is low on account of common mode cancellation of the

50

9.003

phase noise in the USB and LSB since the carrier, USB and LSB are phase correlated
from the modulation process.
We also described an experimental demonstration of code-selective wavelength
conversion that can be used to demultiplex direct sequence encoded optical CDMA
channels. The results we obtained confirm that we have demonstrated code selective
wavelength conversion using RF photonic mixing in a DE-MZM. Unmatched channel
rejection with the use of an orthogonal code was demonstrated. The bipolar nature of the
optical field is recognized since the frequency shift happens before photodetection, thus
allowing full code orthogonality. A coherent effect has been achieved without the use of
an optical local oscillator and the associated difficulties of optical phase locking and
polarization tracking. The spectral separation of the desired channel could lead to
reduction in the effects of cumulative shot noise and speckle, which is important in order
to support more simultaneous users [31]. The ability to pick out a signal from a spectrum
and frequency shift it based on its code may have potential applications in routing
techniques such as optical label switching. Such a link could also be used to carry
microwave CDMA signals over fiber optic links with the ability to demultiplex them in
the optical domain.
While, the demonstration of such functionalities can lend considerable flexibility to
RF photonic links, it is important to realize that the dual-electrode Mach-Zehnder
modulator is currently an expensive and bulky component. It is important to achieve
some level of integration so that these functions can be implemented in an economical
way to create flexible and multi-purpose RF photonic links.

51

Chapter 6 Silicon-on-Insulator Nanophotonics
The transmitter and receiver designs proposed in the previous chapters require
the use of expensive active components. These include sophisticated devices such as the
dual electrode Mach-Zehnder modulator which was used to perform the function of
microwave photonic mixing. Such increased sophistication in communications circuits,
as well as the integration of optical functions into other processing and control systems is
significantly impeded by the cost and complexity of the different optical components that
currently exist in diverse material systems. In order to truly exploit the potential of
optical functionalities across a broad range of applications, it is essential to realize ultracompact multi-functional optics on a single material platform.
Nanophotonic circuits offer one such option. The evolution of microelectronic
technology has now reached the stage where device features that are significantly smaller
than the optical wavelength can easily be fabricated with very high precision. To take
advantage of this trend, it is necessary to make correspondingly small optical devices. A
very high degree of miniaturization demands a high index contrast, in order to achieve
small bend radii and greater confinement. On the other hand, such high index contrast
structures are more susceptible to process inaccuracies and scattering due to surface
roughness.

These

problems

are

being

addressed

by continued

progress

in

microelectronics fabrication.
Semiconductor systems such as InP/air and Si/SiO2 offer the high index contrast
necessary to create such structures. Additionally, these semiconductors exhibit very low
absorption at 1.55 µm, which is the wavelength of interest for optical communications.
While the InP/air system is very attractive on account of the potential to integrate
52

optically active and passive devices on a single chip, InP is still beset by processing
issues, and is not the material of choice in the electronics industry. This issue assumes
special importance since many optical devices require the presence of significant
electronic control in order to work effectively. A silicon based material system, on the
other hand, offers the possibility of integrating both electronic and optical functions on a
single substrate, with processing technology that is already well understood and in wide
industrial use. The rest of this chapter will briefly discuss silicon optoelectronics, with
specific reference to the Si/SiO2 material system that offers great potential for the
integration of both electronic and optical functions on a single substrate. In particular, we
will discuss the problem of coupling light into an SOI nanophotonic IC, which will
motivate the work in the rest of this dissertation.
6.1 Silicon-on-Insulator Optoelectronics

There has been a great deal of recent interest in Silicon optoelectronics [32-41].
Pioneering work by Soref and others led to the development of numerous passive and
active optical devices on Silicon substrates [42-43]. Silicon optoelectronics refers to the
integration of both optical and electrical functions on a silicon chip. This offers unique
advantages, since processing technologies are very well established in silicon, and the
photonics may thus be seamlessly integrated along with the electronics, using a CMOS
process. In particular, SOI has attracted great attention on this front [34-35, 42]. SOI has
already emerged as a future technology for high-speed, low-power electronics on account
of its ability to provide improved circuit performance and guaranteed latch-up free
circuits as compared to bulk silicon. Ever since the first successful SOI manufacturing

53

process, there has been considerable effort directed towards resolving the numerous
materials issues confronting the technology. In addition to the advantages it offers
electronics, SOI offers some unique advantages to optics, such as the existence of a
guiding layer as seen in Figure 6.1. The superficial silicon layer sitting over a buried
oxide layer forms a high index contrast optically confining layer where both electronic
and optical components may be housed. In fact, the potential that SOI offers is being
increasingly noticed in the photonics community, with work directed towards making
passive spectrally selective devices [42] , couplers [44], as well as active devices such as
modulators [45-49] and photodetectors [50-51]. The ultimate vision is that of a
photonic/electronic integrated circuit that can be fabricated using a CMOS compatible
process.

Superficial Silicon (SuperSi)
n = 3.5

Buried Oxide (BOX)

Silicon substrate

n=1.45

n = 3.5

Figure 6.1 The Silicon-on-Insulator material system. Apart from the electronic
advantages of such a system, the superficial silicon (SuperSi) may be used as a
guiding layer for optics, thus enabling the integration of photonic and electronic
devices on a single substrate.

54

A quick remark about the light source is in order. Even though there have been recent
promising developments in the area of developing a silicon-based light source [52], there
is still much work to be done in this area. This is a significant disadvantage for a silicon
based material system, but it is not prohibitive. A silicon nanophotonic IC could derive its
optical power from an off-chip light source in much the same way that an electronic IC
uses an off-chip power supply. Such an architecture would require the coupling of light
from SMF into the IC, and vice versa.
6.2 The coupling problem
Building photonic devices in a high index contrast material system enables
waveguides with smaller bend radii and greater optical confinement. On the other hand,
the high index contrast photonic system comes with a penalty. The Si/SiO2 index contrast
requires that in order for a single mode condition to be maintained, the waveguiding layer
has to be approximately between 200 and 300 nm thick. This results in a huge mismatch
with the guided mode in standard single mode fiber (SMF), precluding the use of simple
end-fire coupling on account of prohibitive insertion losses.
Figure 6.2 shows a to-scale picture of the SMF core, and the cross section
of a photonic crystal waveguide in a thin film of Silicon. The SMF core is approximately
50X larger than the waveguide core, but the difference in mode sizes is larger on account
of the difference in index contrast between the two systems. This necessitates the
development of a low insertion loss I/O interface.

55

Photonic crystal waveguide
SuperSi

SMF Fiber core

Buried Oxide (BOX)

Diameter ~ 9 µm
Silicon substrate

Figure 6.2 To-scale representation of single mode fiber core next to waveguide in a
2D photonic crystal thin film. There is a huge mismatch in the size of the modes
making simple end-fire coupling techniques highly inefficient.

6.3 Requirements from the fiber-IC interface
The requirements of such an interface are simple:
1. Efficiency
This is, by far, the most important requirement. High insertion losses translate into
degraded system performance and may completely preclude the use of silicon
photonics in tight power budget systems.

56

2. Bandwidth
The bandwidth needs to be large enough to allow multiple wavelength channels to
couple in through one device. The number of channels is decided by system
architecture, but the interface needs to couple as large a bandwidth as possible, with
as flat a passband as possible.
3. Low Polarization Dependent Loss (PDL)
The polarization of light in optical fiber at the end of a link is random and
unpredictable. The device needs to couple light in both polarizations into the IC
without preference. Any preference translates into power loss which will convert
polarization fluctuations into power fluctuations, thus degrading system performance.
The design of a practical device must address these design criteria.

6.4 Possible candidates
Two possible candidates present themselves for the efficient coupling between SMF and
the silicon thin film:
1. Adiabatic tapers
Figure 6.3 shows an adiabatic taper. Adiabatic tapers start with a large
mode and gradually modify the effective index of the waveguide so that the mode can
adapt without excessive losses. If the slope is gentle enough to satisfy an adiabatic
condition, then it is possible to make very efficient interfaces. While these devices
have attracted some attention to solve the coupling problem, tapering in two
dimensions implies that the taper must be non-planar, requiring gray scale masking.
CMOS processes are usually planar thus making fabrication of such tapers along with

57

electronics an issue. Furthermore, the etch used to fabricate the taper needs to result
in a very smooth profile. Any roughness will translate into large scattering losses on
account of the high index contrast. A third disadvantage is the reflection that results at
the interface between the fiber and the high index silicon taper. The taper needs to be
anti-reflection coated, resulting in a further non-planar process.

Taper
SuperSi thin film

BOX
Side view of SMF core

Figure 6.3 Adiabatic tapers may be used to make a gentle transition between the
disparate modes, however the fabrication of such tapers involves non-planar
processes such as gray scale masking. In addition, surface roughness can lead to
excessively lossy tapers.

2. Grating couplers
Figure 6.4 illustrates the the use of a grating coupler to couple the light from SMF
into a nanophotonic IC. The grating is a series of perturbations in the waveguide that

58

scatter the light from a fiber into the high index contrast waveguide. Since it is a
completely planar device, it is well suited for adaptation to a CMOS process. The
grating enables top-side coupling of the light into the waveguide. The anti-reflection
features of the grating are built into the design, so no separate non-planar antireflection coating is required. The rest of this dissertation describes the main issues
confronting the design, fabrication and characterization of such couplers. Designing
an efficient grating coupler is an extremely computationally intensive exercise. The
chapters that follow will demonstrate this, while attempting to bring physical
understanding to the mechanism of low loss grating couplers. Using the
understanding developed, we will propose a novel design for a low insertion loss
grating coupler, and describe a proof-of-concept experiment to verify it.

Figure 6.4 Grating couplers are planar devices that may be fabricated by standard
CMOS processes. The grating coupler serves to couple light from the fiber into the
thin film. Coupling into the nanoscale waveguide may be accomplished by curving
the grating teeth, thus accomplishing a simultaneous focusing function.

59

6.5 Conclusions
Silicon-on-Insulator shows great promise as a material system for the
integration of photonics and electronics on a single substrate. However, due to the lack of
a well-developed silicon laser, it is necessary to couple light into a silicon photonic IC
from an external light source. This requires the development of a key enabling
technology viz. an efficient, low insertion loss interface between SMF and the
nanophotonic IC.

60

Chapter 7 Grating coupler design
This chapter deals with the theory of grating couplers, with specific reference to
coupling efficiency. While the coupling mechanism of gratings is well understood, the
issue of efficiency has not been studied in as much detail. The main perceived
disadvantage of grating couplers for low insertion loss fiber-waveguide interfaces, is that
a substantial portion of the incident energy is transmitted through the film and then lost in
the substrate. For this reason, grating couplers were traditionally considered much less
efficient than prism couplers [53].
Grating coupler action can be considered on two levels. The microscopic study of
the grating coupler can be described as the study of variation in coupling strength as a
function of the various grating parameters such as depth, refractive index contrast, grating
tooth profile, duty cycle and period. While considerable effort has been made to develop
analytical [54-56] and numerical [57-58] models to evaluate the grating’s microscopic
properties, relatively little work has been done to investigate the grating coupler’s
macroscopic properties which include a physical understanding of how the grating
functions as a whole device, and how its overall properties are affected by surrounding
structures. It also includes the understanding of how grating efficiency is affected by
external factors such as beam profile and beam alignment. To get a flavor for this,
consider, as a simple illustration, the grating shown in Figure 7.1(a). In this case, the
microscopic and macroscopic behaviors of the grating are identical. However, adding a
single interface underneath the grating as in Fig. 7.1(b), such as exists in a Silicon-onInsulator (SOI) substrate, can make a substantial difference. This is easily understood, if
one considers that light out-coupled into the substrate will now be reflected back into the

61

grating, and undergo additional scattering, with some light coupling back into the
waveguide. The successive reflections and scatterings sum up in an infinite geometric
progression. This modifies the coupling length, as well as the distribution of power
between the substrate and cover. The scattering and power distribution is now a strong
function of the thickness of the buried oxide layer [59] since this affects the optical phase
of the light that is re-coupled into the waveguide. This simple example of a single
interface below the grating, reveals that the eventual efficiencies will be decided by a
complex interaction of various beams bouncing around inside the grating structure.

Semi-infinite oxide

Semi-infinite oxide

Silicon

Semi-infinite oxide

Silicon
Oxide layer

Semi-infinite silicon

(a)

(b)

Figure 7.1 The interfaces and structures surrounding a grating affect its its coupling
length. The grating in (a) has a coupling length that is modified by the additional
interface in (b). The cover/substrate coupling ratio is also affected by the additional
layer in (b).

62

A grating’s efficiency and coupling properties may thus be affected by the
materials and structures that surround it. This is encouraging from the point of view of
efficiency enhancement, since it gives us additional control over the grating’s properties.
To design an efficient coupler it is important to gain a thorough physical understanding of
the way these properties are affected, and how the grating and its surrounding structures
relate to the operation of the coupling device as a whole. Note that this chapter does not
make any attempt to quantitatively analyze the coupling strength at a microscopic level,
but rather seeks to create a physical understanding of grating coupler operation, and to
provide an insight into the design issues that confront such couplers.
Since grating couplers are non-magnetic, they are reciprocal devices.
Accordingly, this chapter will switch back and forth between the in-coupling and outcoupling configurations for grating couplers, depending on which of these configurations
better serves to explain a particular design concept.

7.1 The Design Problem
The design problem is summarized in Fig. 7.2. We need to suppress Ptrans and Prefl while
channeling all the power into either Pback or Pforw. Either Pforw or Pback may be suppressed
by phase matching and appropriate choice of grating period. The suppression of Ptrans and
Prefl is not so straightforward, and after a brief discussion of momentum matching, much
of the rest of the chapter is devoted to understanding the nature of Ptrans and Prefl, together
with ideas to suppress them. In fact, efficient grating design is just about suppressing
these two beams.

63

