USOO70O881 OB2

(12) United States Patent

(10) Patent No.:
US 7,008,810 B2
(45) Date of Patent:
Mar. 7, 2006

HöSS et al.

(54) METHOD FOR FABRICATING AT LEAST

ONE MESA OR RIDGE STRUCTURE ORAT
LEAST ONE ELECTRICALLY PUMPED
REGION IN A LAYER OR LAYER

FOREIGN PATENT DOCUMENTS
DE

101 47 791 A1

9/2001

(Continued)

SEQUENCE

OTHER PUBLICATIONS

(75) Inventors: Christine Höss, Regensburg (DE);

Andreas Weimar, Regensburg (DE);
Andreas Leber, Regensburg (DE);
Alfred Lell, Maxhiitte-Haidhof (DE);
Helmut Fischer, Lappersdorf (DE);
Volker Harle, Laaber (DE)

(73) Assignee: Osram Opto Semiconductors GmbH,
Regensburg (DE)
(*) Notice:

Subject to any disclaimer, the term of this
patent is extended or adjusted under 35

U.S.C. 154(b) by 134 days.
(21) Appl. No.: 10/804,514
Mar 19, 2004
(22) Filed:
Prior Publication Data
(65)
US 2004/0248334 A1

Mar. 19, 2003

(DE) ................................ 103 12 214

(2006.01)
257/E21034

(58) Field of Classification Search .................. 438/39,
438/951; 257/E21.025, E21.034
See application file for complete Search history.
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS

4.296.386 A

10/1981 Tijburg et al.

(Continued)

& Pavane

(57)

ABSTRACT

Sacrificial layer (4) and of the layer or layer Sequence are

Dec. 9, 2004

References Cited

(74) Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Cohen, Pontani, Lieberman

is applied and patterned above the layer or layer Sequence.
A mask layer is applied and patterned above the Sacrificial
layer for definition of the mesa or ridge dimensions. The

(52) U.S. Cl. ................. 438/39, 438/951; 257/E21.025;

(56)

Primary Examiner-George Fourson
ASSistant Examiner Thanh V. Pham

in a layer or layer Sequence, in which a sacrificial layer (4)

(51) Int. Cl.
HOIL 21/00

(Continued)

A method for fabricating at least one mesa or ridge Structure

Foreign Application Priority Data

(30)

Tsuyoshi Tojyo, et al., “High-Power AlGainN Laser Diodes
with High Kink Level and Low Relative Intensity Noise”,
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. vol. 41, pp. 1829-1833, Mar. 2002.

removed So that the mesa or ridge Structure is formed in the

layer or layer sequence. A part of the Sacrificial layer (4) is

selectively removed from the side areas thereof which have
been uncovered in the previous Step, So that a Sacrificial
layer remains which is narrower in comparison with a layer
that has remained above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the
layer or layer Sequence. A coating is applied at least to the
Sidewalls of the Structure produced in the previous StepS. So
that the Side areas of the residual Sacrificial layer are not
completely overformed by the coating material. The Sacri

ficial layer (4) is removed So that the layer that has remained

above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the layer or layer
sequence is lifted off. A method is also disclosed for fabri
cating at least one gain-controlled laser diode in a layer
Sequence, in which method StepS analogous to those
described above are employed.
23 Claims, 6 Drawing Sheets

US 7,008,810 B2
Page 2
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS

4,751,708 A
4949,352 A

6/1988 Jackson et al.
8/1990 Plumb

5,139.968 A * 8/1992 Hayase et al. .............. 438/577
5,426,658 A

6,605,519 B1
6,661,822 B1
6,686,616 B1

6/1995 Kaneno et al.
8/2003 Lishan ....................... 438/555
12/2003 Kubota et al.
2/2004 Allen et al. ................. 257/280

FOREIGN PATENT DOCUMENTS
JP

2001-015860

1/2001

OTHER PUBLICATIONS

Shin-ya Nunoue et al., “Reactive Ion Beam Etching and
Overgrowth Process in the Fabrication of InCaN Inner
Stripe Laser Diodes”, Jpn. J.Appl. Phys. Vol. 37, pp. 1470
1473, Mar. 1998.

M. Kuramoto et al., “Reduction of Internal LOSS and

Threshold Current in a Laser Diode with a Ridge by Selec

tive Re-Growth (RiS-LD)”, phys.statisol.(a) 192, No. 2, pp.
329-334 (2002).

Masaru Kuramoto et al., “Novel-Ridge InGaN Multiple
Quantum-Well Laser Diodes Fabricated by Selective Area
Re-Growth on n-GaN Substrates”, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Vol.
40, pp. L925-L927, Sep. 15, 2001.
Akitaka Kimura et al., “Composition Control during Growth
of AlGaN Cladding Layers for InCaN-MOW Lasers with

Ridge Formed by Selective Re-growth (RiS-type Lasers)”,

Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. vol. 693, Materials Research

Society, pp. 14.5.1-14.5.6 (2002).

Bulman G., et al. “InGaN/GaN laser diodes grown on
6H-SiC", pp. 616-622, Aug. 1998.
* cited by examiner

U.S. Patent

Mar. 7, 2006

Sheet 1 of 6

FIG 1A

FIG 1B

FIG 1 C

2 N-3
4

- 5
--7

US 7,008,810 B2

U.S. Patent

Mar. 7, 2006

Sheet 2 of 6

FIG 1D

FIG 1E

US 7,008,810 B2

U.S. Patent

Mar. 7, 2006

Sheet 3 of 6

FIG 2A

CNJCYD<r-oLON)

FIG2B

CNJCYD<rLOoN)

<rGoN)CYDLCD

US 7,008,810 B2

U.S. Patent

Mar. 7, 2006

Sheet 4 of 6

US 7,008,810 B2

U.S. Patent

Mar. 7, 2006

Sheet 5 of 6

US 7,008,810 B2

U.S. Patent

Mar. 7, 2006

Sheet 6 of 6

FIG 4A

F-2

US 7,008,810 B2

US 7,008,810 B2
1

RELATED APPLICATION

2
quantum well structure (SQW structure) or a multiple quan
tum well structure (MQW structure). Such layer sequences
are known in principle to the perSon Skilled in the art and,
therefore, are not explained in any further detail at this point.
They are described for example in Nunoue et al., Jpn. J.
Appl. Phys., Vol. 37 (1998), pp. 1470–1473, Part 1, No. 3B;
Kuramoto et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 40 (2001, pp.

This patent application claims the priority of German
patent application 10312214.1, the disclosure content of
which is hereby incorporated by reference.

Symp. Proc. Vol. 693 (2002); Kuramoto et al., phys.stat. Sol.
(a) 192, No. 2, 329-334 (2002); Tojyo et al., Jpn. J. Appl.
Phys. 41, 1829 (2002) and Bulman et al., in Properties,

FIELD OF THE INVENTION

Semiconductors, 616, (1998) the disclosure contents of

METHOD FOR FABRICATING AT LEAST
ONE MESA OR RIDGE STRUCTURE OR AT
LEAST ONE ELECTRICALLY PUMPED
REGION IN A LAYER OR LAYER

SEQUENCE

L925–927, Part 2, No. 9A/B; Kimura et al., Mat. Res. Soc.

Processing and Applications of Gallium Nitride and Related

which is in this respect hereby incorporated by reference.
The invention relates to a method for fabricating at least 15
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
one mesa or ridge Structure or at least one electrically
pumped region in a layer or layer Sequence. It relates, in
particular, to a method for fabricating at least one mesa or
One object of the invention is to provide a method for
ridge Structure on or in a Semiconductor layer Sequence fabricating at least one mesa or ridge Structure or at least one
based-on nitride-III-V-compound Semiconductor material electrically pumped region in a layer or layer Sequence,
for optoelectronic Semiconductor chips. Furthermore, the which method is Self-aligning and can be used to fabricate,
invention relates, in particular, to a method for fabricating in particular, Structure widths of less than or equal to 2 um
laser diodes based on nitride-III-V-compound Semiconduc in a technically simplified manner.
tor material with waveguide widths of less than or equal to
When mention is made hereinafter of sacrificial layer,
25 covering layer and mask layer, they may be an individual
2 lim.
layer but also a Sequence of two or more layers which fulfill
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
the function of the Sacrificial layer, the covering layer and
the mask layer, respectively.
Known methods for fabricating index-guided and gain
The above-mentioned object and other objects are
guided laser diode chips are described for example in DE attained in accordance with one aspect of the present inven
101 47 791. With the lithography technique (contact print tion directed to a method for fabricating at least one mesa or
ing) which is proposed and available there, it is possible to ridge Structure in a layer or layer Sequence, in which
obtain laser diodes with waveguide widths <2 um only with Sidewalls of the mesa or ridge Structure are provided with a
a high technical effort. During the opening of a 0.5 um wide coating applied after the uncovering thereof. A Sacrificial
window in the SiO2 passivation, shunts increasingly occur in 35 layer is applied above the layer or layer Sequence and a mask
the case of Small waveguide widths, said shunts arising as a layer is applied and patterned above the Sacrificial layer for
result of alignment tolerances (0.5 um) and run-out effects definition of the mesa or ridge dimensions. The Sacrificial
layer, and the layer or layer Sequence are partially removed
(up to 2 um offset over a 2 in. wafer).
In the case of the RiS method (Ridge by Selective to form the mesa or ridge Structure in the layer or layer
regrowth) disclosed for example by Kuramoto et al., Jpn. J. 40 Sequence. A part of the Sacrificial layer is Selectively

Appl. Phys., Vol. 40 (2001), pp. L925–927, Part 2, No.

removed from the side areas thereof which have been

9A/B; Kimura et al., Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. Vol. 693

uncovered earlier, So that a Sacrificial layer remains which is
(2002) and Kuramoto et al., phys. stat. Sol. (a) 192, No. 2, narrower in comparison with a layer that has remained
329-334 (2002), the epitaxy is interrupted after the growth above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the layer or layer
of an upper waveguide. In a dielectric intermediate layer 45 Sequence. The coating is applied at least to the Sidewalls of
(e.g. SiO2) Subsequently deposited above that, Strip-type the Structure produced in the above StepS. So that the Side
windows are opened (patterning by means of photolithog areas of the residual Sacrificial layer are not completely
raphy and etching). In the Second epitaxy Step, the cladding overformed by the coating material. The Sacrificial layer is
layer of the waveguide and the contact layer grow in the then at least partially removed, So that the layer that has
window Strips. This method requires a plurality of epitaxy 50 remained above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the layer or
Steps. A variation of the indeX guidance, which can be layer Sequence is lifted off.
achieved in the case of a ridge waveguide laser by changing
In this case, the covering layer may have the function of
the etching depth, is difficult.
an adhesion layer between mask layer and Sacrificial layer or
A method for fabricating “InGaN Inner Stripe Laser the function of an etching Stop layer for the wet-chemical
Diodes', which method is similar to the RiS method 55 etching of the Sacrificial layer, or both functions together. If
described above, is described in Nunoue et al., Jpn. J. Appl. the mask layer requires neither an adhesion layer nor an
etching Stop layer, the covering layer may be omitted.
Phys., Vol. 37 (1998), pp. 1470–1473, Part 1, No. 3B.
In contrast to a traditional lift-off technique, the Sacrificial
The group of optoelectronic chips based on nitride-III-Vcompound Semiconductor material in the present case layer particularly preferably comprises a different material
includes, in particular, those chips in which a Semiconductor 60 than photoresist. Possible materials for the sacrificial layer
layer fabricated epitaxially, which generally comprises a are metals (such as gold, silver, aluminum, palladium,
layer Sequence made of different individual layers, contains titanium), dielectrics (Such as aluminum oxide, Silicon
at least one individual layer which has a material from the oxide, Silicon nitride), polymer layers (such as polyimide),
nitride-III-V-compound Semiconductor material System In epitaxially grown layers (such as InN, AIN, GaP, GaAs, InP)

AlGN where 0sXs 1,0sys1 and x+ys 1. The semi 65 or Suitable combinations of these materials.

conductor layer may have, by way of example, a conven
tional pn junction, a double heterostructure, a Single

In order to produce a window in the coating toward the
layer or layer Sequence, for example in order Subsequently

US 7,008,810 B2
3
to apply an electrical connection metallization to the layer or
layer Sequence in the window, the Sacrificial layer is pref
erably completely removed from the layer or layer Sequence.
The method is especially preferably suitable for fabricat
ing the geometrical ridge waveguide Structure of a ridge
waveguide laser diode chip, in particular based on InA

l, GaN where 0sXs 1, 0sys 1 and x+y-1. Ridge

waveguide Structures having a width of less than or equal to
2 tim, in particular of less than or equal to 1.5 tim, can
advantageously be realized in a Self-aligning manner by
means of the method in a technically comparatively simple
C.

4
widths with improved reproducibility (yield) and improved
component characteristic data e.g. in the case of high power
lasers and trapezoidal laserS.

In the case of diverse Semiconductor laser chips (such as

ridge lasers, Stripline lasers, trapezoidal lasers, high power

lasers, etc.) with dry-etched and reflection-coated laser fac
ets, the method makes it possible to produce Structures with
an increased decoupling efficiency and to achieve Simplified
fabrication processes through on-wafer reflection coating.

In the case of diverse Semiconductor laser chips (ridge
etc.) with passivated or absorbently coated chip Side edges,

lasers, Stripline lasers, trapezoidal lasers, high power lasers,

In an advantageous embodiment, the laser facets are the method makes it possible to produce Structures in which
produced by means of dry etching and the coating contains undesirable ring modes are Suppressed by absorber layers.
15 This advantageously leads to an increase in the component
a reflective or antireflective layer System.
Another aspect of the present invention is directed to a efficiency and to the reduction or avoidance of leakage
method for fabricating at least one gain-controlled laser CurrentS.
In the case of index-controlled and gain-controlled lasers,
diode in a layer sequence, in particular based on InAlGa.
x-yN where OSXS1,0sys 1 and X-ys 1. A Sacrificial layer it is possible, with the aid of the Sacrificial layer, to fabricate
is applied above the layer Sequence and a mask layer is Semiconductor laser diodes with a laterally passivated ridge
applied and patterned above the Sacrificial layer. The Sacri waveguide in a Self-aligning manner. The method makes it
ficial layer is partially removed in the regions not covered by possible, in particular, to process index-controlled laser
the mask layer. The Sacrificial layer is Selectively removed diodes with a small waveguide width (<2 um) in conjunction
with high yield. It is possible to employ conventional
from the side areas thereof which have been earlier uncov
ered, So that a Sacrificial layer remains which is narrower in 25 photolithography techniques (for example by means of
comparison with a layer that has remained above the Sacri contact printing). Waveguide structures having a Small width
ficial layer as Seen from the layer Sequence, which narrower are necessary principally in the range of Short wavelengths,
Sacrificial layer defines the electrically pumped region of the Since they allow expectation of kink-free operation (i.e., a
laser diode. A coating is applied at least to the Sidewalls of diagram showing the optical output power VS. the electrical
the Structure produced in the previous StepS. So that the side current has no kinks or Singularities which would indicate
areas of the residual Sacrificial layer are not completely that undesired higher laser modes Start to oscillate in the
overformed by the coating material. The Sacrificial layer is laser resonator) at low threshold currents.
During the fabrication of Such laser Structures, a Sacrificial
at least partially removed, So that the layer that has remained
above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the layer or layer 35 layer made of a metallic, dielectric or organic material is
applied to the Semiconductor layer to be patterned, Said
Sequence is lifted off.
material
being able to be etched or Stripped Selectively with
The method is advantageously Suitable for fabricating
to the Semiconductor layer material and with respect
light-emitting diode chips with coated Side areas of the respect
radiation-generating layer Sequence. The geometrical Struc to the etching mask. In this case, the Sacrificial layer may be
ture of the radiation-generating layer Sequence and the 40 enclosed between other layers, e.g. current expansion
coating are produced by means of a method according to the layer(s) and/or adhesion promoting layer(s). A material (e.g.
SiN., metal, photoresist) applied above the Sacrificial
invention. The method is suitable, in particular, for fabri SiO,
layer
is patterned by means of photolithography, for
cating light-emitting diode chips having an edge length of
to form an etching mask for the Semiconductor
less than or equal to 2 um, in particular of less than or equal example,
layer.
Subsequent
wet- or dry-chemical etching of the sac
to 1.5 lim.
layer causes an undercut on both Sides of the pat
Semiconductor chips, in particular opto-Semiconductor 45 rificial
terned ridge. Once the ridge waveguide has been fabricated
chips (e.g. index-controlled laser diodes, LEDs, high power by
or dry-chemical etching of the Semiconductor layer,
lasers, detectors) with lateral coating can advantageously be it iswetpossible
to apply a passivation layer (dielectric or
fabricated in a Self-aligning manner by means of the method. organic) as a waveguide
cladding layer and for electrical
The method is based on the use of a so-called sacrificial 50 insulation over the whole area.

layer, which may comprise one or more dielectric layers

What is achieved by optimizing the sacrificial layer
thickness, the undercut of the Sacrificial layer and also the
thickness, the material and/or the deposition method for the
passivation is that the Sacrificial layer is not completely
The method can be used to realize a series of different 55 overformed laterally by the passivation. Etching or Stripping
fundamental goals for improving in particular opto-Semi or mechanical influencing (e.g. ultrasound, compressed air,

(SiO, Al-O, SiN, etc.), metallic layers (Au, Ag, Pd, Al),
organic polymer layers, epitaxial layers (InN, GaAs, GaP,
etc.) or a combination thereof.

conductor chips (such as ridge waveguide laser chips, high
power laser chips, trapezoidal laser chips, LED chips, etc.).

mechanical wiping, etc.) of the Sacrificial layer through

these lateral openings lifts off the overlying etching mask
In the case of index-controlled Semiconductor laser chips and Simultaneously opens a window in the passivation on
with electrically and optically passivated ridge Sidewalls, the 60 the ridge, through which the Semiconductor can be electri
method makes it possible to achieve, inter alia, a reduction cally connected.
of the power consumption and an increase in the yield by
The method is advantageously Self-aligning. A shunt
means of defined narrow ridge widths and also a reduction problem, which occurs over the entire wafer region in the
of the fabrication effort.
case of conventional methods for fabricating ridge lasers, is
In the case of gain-controlled Semiconductor laser chips 65 thus eliminated to the greatest possible extent because
and arrays with electrical insulation made of dielectric alignment tolerances virtually no longer play a part in the
layers, the method enables, inter alia, Smaller Structural lithography. By minimizing the undercut of the Sacrificial

US 7,008,810 B2
S

6

layer (for example approximately 200-300 nm on both
sides), the contact window in the passivation may become

Saying that the method Sequences described do not in any
case represent a complete fabrication process for the respec
tive chip.
In the exemplary embodiment illustrated diagrammati
cally in FIGS. 1A to 1G, a metal layer Sequence, comprising

almost as wide as the ridge waveguide. In conjunction with
the p-type contact metallization described in DE 10147791

A1 (DE 10147791A1 is in this respect hereby incorporated
by reference) below the passivation, the electrical connec

a Pt p-type contact metal layer 5 (thickness approximately
40 nm), a sacrificial layer (or lift-off layer) 4 made of Au
(thickness approximately 300 nm) and a covering layer 3
made of Pt (thickness approximately 10 nm), is deposited
(for example by means of vapor deposition or Sputtering)

tion pad is optimized. In the case of p-side-down mounting,
the thermal power loSS can advantageously be better dissi
pated via the now wider metallization and the lifetime of the
component is thereby increased. By Saving a photolithog
raphy, a risk of fracture and a throughput time of the ridge

over the whole area of an epitaxial layer Sequence 6 applied

laser process decrease and the yield (principally of compo
nents having Small waveguide widths) increases signifi

on an SiC substrate (SiC wafer) 7 for a ridge waveguide

cantly.

laser diode chip based on InAlGaN where 0sxs 1,

that it is not necessary to undertake the attempt (usually in
vain) to lift off a structure coated above it.

can be processed. A deep etching (for example by means of
RIE) of the epitaxial layer sequence 6 is effected after the

0sys 1 and X-ys 1. A first mask layer 2 applied over the
In the case of Semiconductor lasers (e.g. high power 15 whole area thereof, said mask layer having a thickness of
lasers; ridge lasers; trapezoidal lasers) with (dry-) etched and approximately 500 nm and being made of SiO2, is patterned
Subsequently passivated or reflection-coated laser facets, the as a hard mask in a first photolithographic Step by means of
Self-alignment technology provided by the method affords RIE (reactive ion etching), the ridge waveguide width being
an optimum alignment of etched and Subsequently passi defined by a previously patterned Second mask layer 1, here
Vated Structures. The method has the advantage that a developed and patterned photoresist layer having a thick
although an etching mask and a lift-off mask may be ness of approximately 1.8 lum. In this respect, cf. FIGS. 1A
arranged in a Self-aligning manner, they may comprise to 1C.
different layer systems. Furthermore, a standard lift-off
After the Stripping of the photoresist layer 1 and dry
technique with photoresist may advantageously be used. etching of the Pt covering layer 3, the Au Sacrificial layer 4
With the low-solvent mask (generally photoresist) which is 25 can be etched wet-chemically. In this case, a lateral undercut
eroded during the dry etching process, it is advantageous of the sacrificial layer 4 limits the smallest ridge width which
In the case of LED chips with passivated chip side areas,
leakage currents are advantageously reduced or avoided,
which leads to an improvement of component properties

dry etching of the Pt p-type contact metal layer 5. In this
respect, cf. FIG. 1D.
Afterward, a passivation or insulating layer 8 made of

(e.g. the breakdown strength). LED chips with passivation
of the chip side areas (e.g. by application of dielectric

SiO, having a thickness of approximately 250 nm is depos

ited over the whole area by means of CVD or sputtering. The
passivation layerS Such as Silicon dioxide, Silicon nitride, thickness of the Sacrificial layer 4, the thickness of the
aluminum oxide) can be improved in terms of their electrical 35 passivation or insulating layer 8 and the CVD/sputtering
(blocking) behavior.
process are coordinated with one another in Such a way that
Further advantages and advantageous refinements and the passivation or insulating layer 8 does not completely
developments of the method emerge from the exemplary overform the Sacrificial layer 4, rather lateral Sidewalls are
embodiments described below in conjunction with FIGS. 1 a 40 left free and accessible. In this respect, cf. FIG. 1E. This is
to 3.
accomplished primarily by Selecting a thickness for insulat
ing layer 8.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS
The lateral openingS 40 in the passivation or insulating
layer 8, which are at the level of the sacrificial layer 4, make
FIGS. 1A to 1G show sections through a layer sequence it possible, by means of wet-chemical etching of the Sacri
for a ridge waveguide laser diode chip in different method 45 ficial layer 4, to lift off the latter together with the first mask
Stages of a first exemplary embodiment;
layer 2 and the second mask layer 1 and to uncover the Pt
FIGS. 2A to 2G Show Sections through a layer Sequence p-type contact metal layer 5 through a window 80 in the
for a Stripline laser diode chip in different method Stages of passivation or insulating layer 8, Said window being formed
a Second exemplary embodiment;
50 on the ridge in the process (FIG. 1F). Although use of
FIG. 3 shows a Section through a ridge waveguide laser wet-chemical etching is preferred for the lift-off task, Vari
ous etching, Stripping or mechanical influences can be
with dry-etched mirror facets;
FIGS. 4A to 4C show sections through a layer sequence applied (e.g., ultrasound, compressed air, mechanical wip
for a light-emitting diode chip in different method Stages of ing) to the Sacrificial layer through lateral openings 40.
After a Ti/Au connection metal layer 9 has been deposited
a Second exemplary embodiment.
55
over the whole area, the p-type contact of the ridge
waveguide laser diode chip is electrically connected via Said
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE

window 80 (FIG. 1G). The Ti/Au metal layer 9 is subse

INVENTION

quently patterned by means of photolithography and etch

In the various exemplary embodiments, identical or iden Ing.
Thus, overall, only two lithography Steps are required for
tically acting constituent parts are in each case provided with
the same designations and reference Symbols. The drawings the ridge waveguide laser diode process.
The method for fabricating a Stripline laser diode chip
of FIGS. 1A to 4C are expressly not to scale. The layer
thicknesses used in these drawings cannot be used to deduce based on InAlGaN where 0sXs 1, 0sys1 and
the ratio of the real layer thicknesses. Furthermore, only the 65 x+ys 1, which method is illustrated in FIGS. 2A to 2G,
Steps which are essential for explaining the invention are differs from the method described above in conjunction with
described in the exemplary embodiments. It goes without FIGS. 1A to 1G essentially only by the fact that no deep
60

US 7,008,810 B2
7
8
etching of the epitaxial layer Sequence 6 is effected for a
d) Selective removal of a part of the sacrificial layer from
the side areas thereof which have been uncovered in
stripline laser diode chip. In this respect, cf. FIG. 2D.
In the case of the ridge waveguide laser Structure which
Step c), So that a sacrificial layer remains which is
narrower in comparison with a layer that has remained
is illustrated in FIG. 3, it is fabricated by a method essen
tially according to the first exemplary embodiment described
above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the layer or
layer Sequence;
above (although cover layer 3 has been omitted). The ridge
waveguide laser has mirror facets 60 defining the laser
e) application of the coating at least to the Sidewalls of the
resonator of the ridge waveguide laser which extends in a
Structure produced in steps a) to d) so that the side areas
lateral direction. Preferably, the mirror facets are formed by
of the residual Sacrificial layer are not completely
a dry etch process. Fabricating the mirror facets 60 by means 1O
Overformed by the coating material; and
of dry etching simplifies fabrication and handling, Since a
f) at least partial removal of the Sacrificial layer, so that
Scribing and breaking and possibly a thickness processing of
the layer that has remained above the Sacrificial layer as
the wafer can be obviated or effected only after an on-wafer
Seen from the layer or layer Sequence is lifted off.
facet coating.
2.
The
method as claimed in claim 1, in which, in Step f),
The action of the anisotropic dry etching component on 15 the Sacrificial layer is removed completely, to produce a
the facets 60 is facilitated by thin etching masks given the window toward the layer or layer Sequence in the coating.
Same coverage density of the components. If the dry etching
3. The method as claimed in claim 2, in which an
mask 2 is situated on an incipiently etched Sacrificial layer electrical connection metallization is applied to the layer or
4, then the facets 60, dry-etched e.g. by means of CAIBE, layer Sequence in the window.
can be reflection-coated or antireflection-coated with dielec
4. A method for fabricating at least one ridge waveguide
tric layer systems (lambda/4 layer (pair)(s)) whilst still laser diode chip based on InAlGaN where 0sxs 1,
joined in the wafer. After the lift-off of the sacrificial layer 0sys 1 and X-ys 1, in which the geometrical ridge
4, the bonding pads or the p-type metal layer are accessible waveguide Structure is fabricated by means of a method as
for electrical connection.
claimed in claim 1.
The exemplary embodiment in accordance with FIGS. 4A 25 5. The method as claimed in claim 4, in which the width
to 4C for fabricating a light-emitting diode chip InAlGa. of the ridge waveguide Structure is less than or equal to 2
x-yN where 0SXS1,0sys 1 and X-ys 1 comprises a mask plm.
layer 2 for mesa etching, which is situated on a Sacrificial
6. The method as claimed in claim 4, in which, in step c),
layer 4. A reflection-coated contact metallization 70 is the facets of the laser diode chip are produced by means of
applied at the rear side of the SiC Substrate 7. cf. FIG. 4A. dry etching and the coating contains a reflective or antire
The mesa patterning of the radiation-emitting epitaxial flective layer System.
layer sequence 6 based on InAlGaN where 0sxs1,
7. A method for fabricating at least one light-emitting
0sys 1 and X-ys 1 is followed by the application of a diode chip with coating of the Side areas of the radiation
dielectric passivation layer 8 to the four Side areas by generating layer Sequence, in which the geometrical Struc
whole-area application of dielectric layers, e.g. made of 35 ture of the radiation-generating layer Sequence and the
SiO, (FIG. 4B). The lift-off of the sacrificial layer 4 together coating are produced by means of a method as claimed in
with the etching mask layer 2 results in the uncovering of the claim 1.
p-type contact 5 for electrical connection and for the decou
8. The method as claimed in claim 7, in which an edge
pling of light (indicated by the arrows 11 in FIG. 4C).
length
of the light-emitting diode chip is less than or equal
The scope of protection of the invention is not limited to 40 to 2 um.
the examples given hereinabove. The invention is embodied
9. A method for fabricating at least one gain-controlled
in each novel characteristic and each combination of char
laser diode in a layer Sequence, in particular based on
acteristics, which particularly includes every combination of In AlGaN where 0sXs 1,0sys1 and x+ys 1, having
any features which are Stated in the claims, even if this the following method steps:
feature or this combination of features is not explicitly Stated 45 a) application of a sacrificial layer above the layer
in the claims or in the examples.
Sequence,
Thus, by way of example, between the layer or layer
b)
application and patterning of a mask layer above the
Sequence and the Sacrificial layer and between the Sacrificial
Sacrificial
layer;
layer and the mask layer there may be present one or more
c)
partial
removal
of the Sacrificial layer in the regions not
further layers which have additional functions, without the 50
covered
by
the
mask layer;
respective method departing from the technical teaching
d)
Selective
removal
of a part of the sacrificial layer from
provided by the present invention.
the side areas thereof which have been uncovered in
We claim:
Step c), So that a sacrificial layer remains which is
narrower in comparison with a layer that has remained
1. A method for fabricating at least one mesa or ridge 55
above the Sacrificial layer as Seen from the layer
Structure in a layer or layer Sequence, in which Sidewalls of
Sequence, which narrower Sacrificial layer defines the
the mesa or ridge Structure are provided with a coating
electrically pumped region of the laser diode;
applied after the uncovering thereof, having the following
e) application of a coating at least to the Sidewalls of the
method steps:
Structure produced in steps a) to d) so that the side areas
a) application of a sacrificial layer above the layer or layer 60
of the residual Sacrificial layer are not completely
Sequence,
Overformed by the coating material; and
b) application and patterning of a mask layer above the
f) at least partial removal of the Sacrificial layer, so that
Sacrificial layer for definition of the mesa or ridge
the layer that has remained above the Sacrificial layer as
dimensions,
Seen from the layer or layer Sequence is lifted off.
c) partial removal of the sacrificial layer and of the layer 65
or layer Sequence, to form the mesa or ridge Structure
10. The method as claimed in claim 9, in which the width
in the layer or layer Sequence;
of the pumped region is less than or equal to 2 um.

US 7,008,810 B2
9
11. The method as claimed in claim 9, in which, in step f),

the Sacrificial layer is removed completely, So that a window
toward the layer Sequence is produced in the coating.
12. The method as claimed in claim 11, in which an

electrical connection metallization is applied to the layer
Sequence in the window.
13. The method as claimed in claim 9, in which the

Sacrificial layer comprises a metal, a dielectric, a polymer, an
epitaxially grown material or a combination of these mate
rials.

14. The method as claimed in claim 9, in which step b)

10
18. The method as claimed in claim 1, in which step b)
effects the application and patterning of a first mask layer
above the Sacrificial layer and a Second mask layer above the
first mask layer.
19. The method as claimed in claim 1, in which a covering
layer is applied before the application of the mask layer
above the Sacrificial layer.
20. The method as claimed in claim 4, in which the width

of the ridge waveguide Structure, the edge length or, respec
tively, the width of the pumped region is less than or equal
to 1.5 lim.

effects the application and patterning of a first mask layer
above the Sacrificial layer and a Second mask layer above the
21. The method as claimed in claim 8, in which the width
first mask layer.
of
the ridge waveguide Structure, the edge length or, respec
15
15. The method as claimed in claim 9, in which a covering
layer is applied before the application of the mask layer tively, the width of the pumped region is less than or equal
above the Sacrificial layer.
to 1.5 lim.
16. The method as claimed in claim 10, in which the width
The method of claim 1, wherein said partial removal
of the ridge waveguide Structure, the edge length or, respec of22.
the
Sacrificial layer is done by anisotropic etching.
tively, the width of the pumped region is less than or equal
23. The method of claim 9, wherein said partial removal
to 1.5 lim.
of the Sacrificial layer is done by anisotropic etching.
17. The method as claimed in claim 1, in which the
Sacrificial layer comprises a metal, a dielectric, a polymer, an
epitaxially grown material or a combination of these mate
rials.

